DISEASE: Asthma
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Anxiety may also be caused by environmental or
occupational factors. People who must live or work
around sudden or loud noises, bright or flashing lights,
chemical vapors, or similar nuisances, which they cannot
avoid or control, may develop heightened anxiety levels.
Existential anxiety
Another factor that shapes human experiences of
anxiety is knowledge of personal mortality. Humans are
the only animals that appear to be aware of their limited
life span. Some researchers think that awareness of
death influences experiences of anxiety from the time
that a person is old enough to understand death.
Symptoms of anxiety
In order to understand the diagnosis and treat-
ment of anxiety, it is helpful to have a basic under-
standing of its symptoms.
SOMATIC. The somatic or physical symptoms of
anxiety include headaches,dizziness or lightheaded-
ness, nausea and/or vomiting, diarrhea, tingling, pale
complexion, sweating,numbness, difficulty in breath-
ing, and sensations of tightness in the chest, neck,
shoulders, or hands. These symptoms are produced
by the hormonal, muscular, and cardiovascular reac-
tions involved in the fight-or-flight reaction. Children
and adolescents withgeneralized anxiety disordershow
a high percentage of physical complaints.
BEHAVIORAL. Behavioral symptoms of anxiety
include pacing, trembling, general restlessness, hyper-
ventilation, pressured speech, hand wringing, or finger
tapping.
COGNITIVE. Cognitive symptoms of anxiety
include recurrent or obsessive thoughts, feelings of
doom, morbid or fear-inducing thoughts or ideas,
and confusion, or inability to concentrate.
EMOTIONAL. Feeling states associated with anxi-
ety include tension or nervousness, feeling ‘‘hyper’’ or
‘‘keyed up,’’ and feelings of unreality, panic, or terror.
DEFENSE MECHANISMS. In psychoanalytic theory,
the symptoms of anxiety in humans may arise from or
activate a number of unconscious defense mechan-
isms. Because of these defenses, it is possible for a
person to be anxious without being consciously
aware of it or appearing anxious to others. These
psychological defenses include:
/C15Repression. The person pushes anxious thoughts or
ideas out of conscious awareness.
/C15Displacement. Anxiety from one source is attached
to a different object or event. Phobias are an example
of the mechanism of displacement in psychoanalytic
theory.
/C15Rationalization. The person justifies the anxious
feelings by saying that any normal person would
feel anxious in their situation.
/C15Somatization. The anxiety emerges in the form of
physical complaints and illnesses, such as recurrent
headaches, stomach upsets, or muscle and joint pain.
/C15Delusion formation. The person converts anxious
feelings into conspiracy theories or similar ideas
without reality testing. Delusion formation can
involve groups as well as individuals.
Other theorists attribute some drugaddictionto the
desire to relieve symptoms of anxiety. Most addictions,
they argue, originate in the use of mood-altering sub-
stances or behaviors to ‘‘medicate’’ anxious feelings.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anxiety is difficult and complex
because of the variety of its causes and the highly
personalized and individualized nature of its symptom
formation. There are no medical tests that can be used
to diagnose anxiety by itself. When a doctor examines
an anxious patient, he or she will first rule out physical
conditions and diseases that have anxiety as a symp-
tom. Apart from these exclusions, thephysical exam-
ination is usually inconclusive. Some anxious patients
may have their blood pressure or pulse rate affected by
anxiety, or may look pale or perspire heavily, but
others may appear physically completely normal.
The doctor will then take the patient’s medication,
dietary, and occupational history to see if they are
taking prescription drugs that might cause anxiety, if
they are abusing alcohol or mood-altering drugs,
if they are consuming large amounts of caffeine, or if
their workplace is noisy or dangerous. In most cases,
the most important source of diagnostic information is
the patient’s psychological and social history. The
doctor may administer a brief psychological test to
help evaluate the intensity of the patient’s anxiety and
some of its features. Some tests that are often given
include the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and the Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS). Many doctors
will check a number of chemical factors in the blood,
such as the level of thyroid hormone and blood sugar.
Treatment
Not all patients with anxiety require treatment,
but for more severe cases, treatment is recommended.
Because anxiety often has more than one cause and is
experienced in highly individual ways, its treatment
360 Anxiety
usually requires more than one type of therapy. In
addition, there is no way to tell in advance how
patients will respond to a specific drug or therapy.
Sometimes the doctor will need to try different medi-
cations or methods of treatment before finding the
best combination for the particular patient. It usually
takes about six to eight weeks for the doctor to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of a treatment regimen.
Medications
Medications are often prescribed to relieve the
physical and psychological symptoms of anxiety.
Most agents work by counteracting the biochemical
and muscular changes involved in the fight-or-flight
reaction. Some work directly on the chemicals in the
brain that are thought to underlie the anxiety.
ANXIOLYTICS. Anxiolytics are sometimes called
tranquilizers. Most anxiolytic drugs are eitherbenzo-
diazepines or barbiturates. Barbiturates, once com-
monly used, are now rarely used in clinical practice.
Barbiturates work by slowing down the transmission
of nerve impulses from the brain to other parts
of the body. They include such drugs as phenobarbital
(Luminal) and pentobarbital (Nembutal). Benzodia-
zepines work by relaxing the skeletal muscles and
calming the limbic system. They include such drugs
as chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and diazepam
(Valium). Both barbiturates and benzodiazepines are
potentially habit-forming and may cause withdrawal
symptoms, but benzodiazepines are far less likely than
barbiturates to cause physical dependency. Both drugs
also increase the effects of alcohol and should never be
taken in combination with it.
Two other types of anxiolytic medications
include meprobamate (Equanil), which is now
rarely used, and buspirone (BuSpar), a new type
of anxiolytic that appears to work by increasing
the efficiency of the body’s own emotion-regulating
brain chemicals. Buspirone has several advantages
over other anxiolytics. It does not cause depen-
dence problems, does not interact with alcohol,
and does not affect the patient’s ability to drive
or operate machinery. However, buspirone is not
effective against certain types of anxiety, such as
panic disorder.
ANTIDEPRESSANTS AND BETA-BLOCKERS. For some
anxiety disorders, such as obsessive-compulsive disor-
der and panic type anxiety, a type of drugs used to treat
depression, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs; such as Prozac and Paxil), are the treatment
of choice. A newer drug that has been shown as effec-
tive as Paxil is called escitalopram oxalate (Lexapro).
Because anxiety often coexists with symptoms of
depression, many doctors prescribe antidepressant
medications for anxious/depressed patients. While
SSRIs are more common, antidepressants are some-
times prescribed, including tricyclic antidepressants
such as imipramine (Tofranil) ormonoamine oxidase
inhibitors (MAO inhibitors) such as phenelzine
(Nardil).
Beta-blockers are medications that work by
blocking the body’s reaction to the stress hormones
that are released during the fight-or-flight reaction.
They include drugs like propranolol (Inderal) or ate-
nolol (Tenormin). Beta-blockers are sometimes given
to patients with post-traumatic anxiety symptoms.
More commonly, the beta-blockers are given to
patients with a mild form of social phobic anxiety,
such as fear of public speaking.
Psychotherapy
Most patients with anxiety will be given some
form of psychotherapy along with medications.
Many patients benefit from insight-oriented therapies,
which are designed to help them uncover unconscious
conflicts and defense mechanisms in order to under-
stand how their symptoms developed. Patients who
are extremely anxious may benefit from supportive
psychotherapy, which aims at symptom reduction
rather than personality restructuring.
Two newer approaches that work well with
anxious patients are cognitive-behavioral therapy
(CBT), and relaxation training. In CBT, the patient
is taught to identify the thoughts and situations that
stimulate his or her anxiety, and to view them more
realistically. In the behavioral part of the program, the
patient is exposed to the anxiety-provoking object,
situation, or internal stimulus (like a rapid heart
beat) in gradual stages until he or she is desensitized
to it. Relaxation training, which is sometimes called
anxiety management training, includes breathing exer-
cises and similar techniques intended to help the
patient prevent hyperventilation and relieve the mus-
cle tension associated with the fight-or-flight reaction.
Both CBT and relaxation training can be used in
group therapy as well as individual treatment. In addi-
tion to CBT, support groups are often helpful to
anxious patients, because they provide a social net-
work and lessen the embarrassment that often accom-
panies anxiety symptoms.
Psychosurgery
Surgery on the brain is very rarely recommended
for patients with anxiety; however, some patients with
severe cases of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Anxiety
have been helped by an operation on a part of
the brain that is involved in OCD. Normally, this
operation is attempted after all other treatments have
failed.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for anxiety cover a variety
of approaches. Meditation and mindfulness training
are thought beneficial to patients with phobias and
panic disorder. Hydrotherapy is useful to some
anxious patients because it promotes general relaxa-
tion of the nervous system.Yoga, aikido, t’ai chi, and
dance therapy help patients work with the physical, as
well as the emotional, tensions that either promote
anxiety or are created by the anxiety.
Homeopathy and traditional Chinese medicine
approach anxiety as a symptom of a systemic disorder.
Homeopathic practitioners select a remedy based on
other associated symptoms and the patient’s general
constitution. Chinese medicine regards anxiety as a
blockage of qi, or vital force, inside the patient’s
body that is most likely to affect the lung and large
intestine meridian flow. The practitioner of Chinese
medicine choosesacupuncture point locations and/or
herbal therapy to move the qi and rebalance the entire
system in relation to the lung and large intestine.
Prognosis
The prognosis for resolution of anxiety depends
on the specific disorder and a wide variety of factors,
including the patient’s age, sex, general health, living
situation, belief system, social support network, and
responses to different anxiolytic medications and
forms of therapy.
Prevention
Humans have significant control over thoughts,
and, therefore, may learn ways of preventing anxiety
by changing irrational ideas and beliefs. Humans
also have some power over anxiety arising from
social and environmental conditions. Other forms
of anxiety, however, are built into the human organ-
ism and its life cycle, and cannot be prevented or
eliminated.
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘Lexapro Found to be as Effective as Paxil.’’Mental Health
Weekly Digest(April 12, 2004): 16.
Masi, Gabriele, et al. ‘‘Generalized Anxiety Disorder in
Referred Children and Adolescents.’’Journal of the
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(June 2004): 752–761.
‘‘Patients With Traumatic Bone Injuries Have Unrecognized
Anxiety.’’Health & Medicine Week(June 28, 2004): 824.
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Teresa G. Odle
Anxiety disorders
Definition
The anxiety disorders are a group of mental dis-
turbances characterized by anxiety as a central or core
symptom. Although anxiety is a commonplace experi-
ence, not everyone who experiences it has an anxiety
disorder. Anxiety is associated with a wide range of
physical illnesses, medication side effects, and other
psychiatric disorders.
The revisions of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)that took place
after 1980 brought major changes in the classification
of the anxiety disorders. Prior to 1980, psychiatrists
classified patients on the basis of a theory that defined
anxiety as the outcome of unconscious conflicts in the
patient’s mind. DSM-III (1980), DSM-III-R (1987),
and DSM-IV (1994) introduced and refined a new
classification that considered recent discoveries
about the biochemical and post-traumatic origins
of some types of anxiety. The present definitions
are based on the external and reported symptom
patterns of the disorders rather than on theories
about their origins.
Description
Anxiety disorders are the most common form of
mental disturbance in the United States population. It is
estimated that 28 million people suffer from an anxiety
disorder every year. These disorders are a serious pro-
blem for the entire society because of their interference
with patients’ work, schooling, and family life. They
also contribute to the high rates of alcohol and sub-
stance abuse in the United States. Anxiety disorders
are an additional problem for health professionals
because the physical symptoms of anxiety frequently
bring people to primary care doctors or emergency
rooms.
DSM-IV defines 12 types of anxiety disorders in
the adult population. They can be grouped under
seven headings:
362 Anxiety disorders
/C15Panic disorders with or withoutagoraphobia. The
chief characteristic ofpanic disorderis the occurrence
of panic attacks coupled with fear of their recurrence.
In clinical settings, agoraphobia is usually not a dis-
order byitself, but is typically associated with some
form of panic disorder. Patients with agoraphobia
are afraid of places or situations in which they might
have a panic attack and be unable to leave or to find
help. About 25% of patients with panic disorder
develop obsessive-compulsive disorder(OCD).
/C15Phobias. These include specific phobias and social
phobia. A phobia is an intense irrational fear of a
specific object or situation that compels the patient
to avoid it. Some phobias concern activities or
objects that involve some risk (for example, flying
or driving) but many are focused on harmless ani-
mals or other objects. Social phobia involves a fear of
being humiliated, judged, or scrutinized. It manifests
itself as a fear of performing certain functions in the
presence of others, such as public speaking or using
public lavatories.
/C15Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). This disorder
is marked by unwanted, intrusive, persistent
thoughts or repetitive behaviors that reflect the
patient’s anxiety or attempts to control it. It affects
between 2-3% of the population and is much more
common than was previously thought.
/C15Stress disorders. These includepost-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) and acute stress disorder. Stress
disorders are symptomatic reactions to traumatic
events in the patient’s life.
/C15Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). GAD is the
most commonly diagnosed anxiety disorder and
occurs most frequently in young adults.
/C15Anxiety disorders due to known physical causes.
These include general medical conditions or sub-
stance abuse.
/C15Anxiety disorder not otherwise specified. This last
category is not a separate type of disorder, but is
included to cover symptoms that do not meet the
specific DSM-IV criteria for other anxiety disorders.
All DSM-IV anxiety disorder diagnoses include a
criterion of severity. The anxiety must be severe
enough to interfere significantly with the patient’s
occupational or educational functioning, social activ-
ities or close relationships, and other customary
activities.
The anxiety disorders vary widely in their fre-
quency of occurrence in the general population, age
of onset, family patterns, and gender distribution. The
stress disorders and anxiety disorders caused by
medical conditions or substance abuse are less age-
and gender-specific. Whereas OCD affects males and
females equally, GAD, panic disorder, and specific
phobias all affect women more frequently than men.
GAD and panic disorders are more likely to develop in
young adults, while phobias and OCD can begin in
childhood.
Anxiety disorders in children and adolescents
DSM-IV defines one anxiety disorder as specific
to children, namely, separation anxiety disorder. This
disorder is defined as anxiety regarding separation
from home or family that is excessive or inappropriate
for the child’s age. In some children, separation anxi-
ety takes the form of school avoidance.
Children and adolescents can also be diagnosed
with panic disorder, phobias, generalized anxiety dis-
order, and the post-traumatic stress syndromes.
Causes and symptoms
The causes of anxiety include a variety of indivi-
dual and general social factors, and may produce phy-
sical, cognitive, emotional, or behavioral symptoms.
The patient’s ethnic or cultural background may also
influence his or her vulnerability to certain forms of
anxiety. Genetic factors that lead to biochemical
abnormalities may also play a role.
Anxiety in children may be caused by suffering
from abuse, as well as by the factors that cause anxiety
in adults.
KEY TERMS
Agoraphobia— Abnormal anxiety regarding public
places or situations from which the patient may
wish to flee or in which he or she would be helpless
in the event of a panic attack.
Compulsion— A repetitive or ritualistic behavior
that a person performs to reduce anxiety.
Compulsions often develop as a way of controlling
or ‘‘undoing’’ obsessive thoughts.
Obsession— A repetitive or persistent thought,
idea, or impulse that is perceived as inappropriate
and distressing.
Panic attack— A time-limited period of intense fear
accompanied by physical and cognitive symptoms.
Panic attacks may be unexpected or triggered by
specific cues.
Anxiety disorders
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of anxiety disorders is complicated by
the variety of causes of anxiety and the range of disor-
ders that may include anxiety as a symptom. Many
patients who suffer from anxiety disorders have features
or symptoms of more than one disorder. Patients whose
anxiety is accounted for by another psychic disorder,
such as schizophrenia or major depression, are not
diagnosed with an anxiety disorder. A doctor examining
an anxious patient will usually begin by ruling out dis-
eases that are known to cause anxiety and then proceed
to take the patient’s medication history, in order to
exclude side effects of prescription drugs. Most doctors
will ask about caffeine consumption to see if the
patient’s dietary habits are a factor. The patient’s work
and family situation will also be discussed. Often, pri-
mary care physicians will exhaust resources looking for
medical causes for general patient complaints which
may indicate a physical illness. In 2004, the Anxiety
Disorders Association of American published guide-
l i n e st ob e t t e ra i dp h y s i c i a n si nd i a g n o s i n ga n dm a n a -
ging generalized anxiety disorder. Laboratory tests for
blood sugar and thyroid function are also common.
Diagnostic testing for anxiety
There are no laboratory tests that can diagnose
anxiety, although the doctor may order some specific
tests to rule out disease conditions. Although there is
no psychiatric test that can provide definite diagnoses
of anxiety disorders, there are several short-answer
interviews or symptom inventories that doctors can
use to evaluate the intensity of a patient’s anxiety
and some of its associated features. These measures
include the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and the Anxiety
Disorders Interview Schedule (ADIS).
Treatment
For relatively mild anxiety disorders, psychother-
apy alone may suffice. In general, doctors prefer to use
a combination of medications and psychotherapy with
more severely anxious patients. Most patients respond
better to a combination of treatment methods than to
either medications or psychotherapy in isolation.
Because of the variety of medications and treatment
approaches that are used to treat anxiety disorders, the
doctor cannot predict in advance which combination
will be most helpful to a specific patient. In many cases
the doctor will need to try a new medication or treat-
ment over a six- to eight-week period in order to assess
its effectiveness. Treatment trials do not necessarily
mean that the patient cannot be helped or that the
doctor is incompetent.
Although anxiety disorders are not always easy to
diagnose, there are several reasons why it is important
for patients with severe anxiety symptoms to get help.
Anxiety doesn’t always go away by itself; it often
progresses to panic attacks, phobias, and episodes of
depression. Untreated anxiety disorders may even-
tually lead to a diagnosis of major depression, or
interfere with the patient’s education or ability to
keep a job. In addition, many anxious patients develop
addictions to drugs or alcohol when they try to ‘‘med-
icate’’ their symptoms. Moreover, since children learn
ways of coping with anxiety from their parents, adults
who get help for anxiety disorders are in a better
position to help their families cope with factors that
lead to anxiety than those who remain untreated.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments for anxiety cover a variety
of approaches. Meditation and mindfulness training
are thought beneficial to patients with phobias and
panic disorder. Hydrotherapy is useful to some
anxious patients because it promotes general relaxa-
tion of the nervous system.Yoga, aikido, t’ai chi, and
dance therapy help patients work with the physical, as
well as the emotional, tensions that either promote
anxiety or are created by the anxiety.
Homeopathy and traditional Chinese medicine
approach anxiety as a symptom of a systemic disorder.
Homeopathic practitioners select a remedy based on
other associated symptoms and the patient’s general
constitution. Chinese medicine regards anxiety as a
blockage of qi, or vital force, inside the patient’s
body that is most likely to affect the lung and large
intestine meridian flow. The practitioner of Chinese
medicine choosesacupuncture point locations and/or
herbal therapy to move the qi and rebalance the entire
system in relation to the lung and large intestine.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery depends on the speci-
fic disorder, the severity of the patient’s symptoms, the
specific causes of the anxiety, and the patient’s degree
of control over these causes.
Prevention
Anxiety is an unavoidable feature of human exis-
tence. However, humans have some power over their
reactions to anxiety-provoking events and situations.
Cognitive therapy and meditation or mindfulness
training appear to be beneficial in helping people
lower their long-term anxiety levels.
364 Anxiety disorders
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘Guidelines to Assist Primary Care Physicians in Diagnosing
GAD.’’ Psychiatric Times( J u l y1 ,2 0 0 4 ) :1 6 .
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Teresa G. Odle
Anxiolytics see Antianxiety drugs
Aortic aneurysm
Definition
An aneurysm is an abnormal bulging or swelling
of a portion of a blood vessel. The aorta, which can
develop these abnormal bulges, is the large blood
vessel that carries oxygen-rich blood away from the
heart to the rest of the body.
Description
The aorta carries oxygen-rich blood to the body,
and is therefore called an artery. Because the aorta is an
artery, its walls are made of up three layers; a thin inner
layer, a muscular middle layer (that gives the vessel its
flexibility under pressure from the filling blood), and a
fiber-like outer layer that gives the vessel strength to not
burst when the heart pumps blood to the body.
Aortic aneurysms occur when a weakness devel-
ops in part of the wall of the aorta; three basic
types are usually found. If all three layers of the
vessel are affected and weakness develops along an
extended area of the vessel, the weakened area will
appear as a large, bulging region of blood vessel;
this is called a fusiform aneurysm. If weakness
develops between the inner and outer layers of the
aortic wall, a bulge results as blood from the inter-
ior of the vessel is pushed around the damaged
region in the wall and collects between these layers.
This is called a dissecting aneurysm because one
layer is ‘‘dissected’’ or separated from another. If
damage occurs to only the middle (muscular) layer
of the vessel, a sack-like bulge can form; therefore,
this is a saccular aneurysm.
Causes and symptoms
Aortic aneurysms occur in different portions of
the aorta, which begins in the chest (at the heart) and
travels downward through the abdomen. Aneurysms
found in the region of the aorta within the chest are
called thoracic aortic aneurysms. Aneurysms that
occur in the part of the aorta within the abdomen are
called abdominal aortic aneurysms.
Thoracic aortic aneurysms do not usually pro-
duce any noticeable symptoms. However, as the
aneurysm becomes larger, chest, shoulder, neck,
lower back, or abdominal pain can result.
Abdominal aortic aneurysms occur more often in
men, and these aneurysms can cause pain in the
lower back, hips, and abdomen. A painful abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm usually means that the aneurysm
could burst very soon.
Most abdominal aortic aneurysms are caused by
atherosclerosis, a condition caused when fat (mostly
cholesterol) carried in the blood builds up in the inner
wall of the aorta. As more and more fat attaches to the
aortic wall, the wall itself becomes abnormally weak
and often results in an aneurysm or bulge.
An aneurysm in progress. An aneurysm is an abnormal
bulging or swelling of a portion of a blood vessel. (Custom
Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
Surgery being performed to correct aortic aneurysm.(Custom
Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
Aortic aneurysm
Aortic aneurysms are also caused by a breakdown
of the muscular middle layer of the artery wall, by high
blood pressure, by direct injury to the chest, and
although rare, by bacteria that can infect the aorta.
Diagnosis
Silent, stable aneurysms are often detected when a
person has an x ray as part of a routine examination or
for other medical reasons. Otherwise, when chest,
abdominal, or back pain is severe, aortic aneurysm is
suspected and x-ray (radiographic) studies can con-
firm or rule out that condition.
Treatment
Aortic aneurysms are potentially life-threatening
conditions. Small aneurysms should be monitored for
their rate of growth and large aneurysms require con-
sideration for a surgical repair. The most common
Aortic 
aneurysm
Aorta
Subclavian artery
Carotid artery
Heart
Hepatic artery
Messentric artery
Iliac artery
Renal artery
Pulmonary artery
Liver
Kidney
Aortic aneurysms occur when a weakness develops in a part of the wall of the aorta. The aorta is the large blood vessel that
carries oxygen-rich blood away from the heart to the rest of the body.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
KEY TERMS
Atherosclerosis— The accumulation of fat on the
inner wall of an artery. This fat is largely made up
of cholesterol being carried in the blood.
Dacron— A synthetic polyester fiber used to surgi-
cally repair damaged sections of blood vessel walls.366 Aortic aneurysm
method of surgical repair is to cut out the bulging
section of artery wall and sew a Dacron fiber material
into its place in the vessel wall.
Prognosis
Only 1-2% of people die from having surgical
repair of an aortic aneurysm. However, if the aneurysm
is untreated and eventually ruptures, less than half of
the people with ruptured aneurysms will survive. The
challenge for the physician is to decide when or if to do
the preventive surgery.
Prevention
Aneuryms can develop in people with athero-
sclerosis. High blood pressure can also lead to this
condition. Although no definite prevention exists, life-
style and dietary changes that help lower blood pres-
sure and the amount of fat in the blood stream may
slow the development of aneurysms.
Resources
PERIODICALS
van der Vleit, J. Adam, and Albert P. M. Boll. ‘‘Abdominal
AorticAneurysm.’’The Lancet349 (March 22, 1997): 863.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,
TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://
www.americanheart.org>.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Dominic De Bellis, PhD
Aortic dissection
Definition
Aortic dissection is a rare, but potentially fatal,
condition in which blood passes through the inner
lining and between the layers of the aorta. The dissect-
ing aorta usually does not burst, but has an abnormal
second channel within it.
Description
A defect in the inner lining of the aorta allows an
opening or tear to develop. The aorta is the main
artery of the body and is an area of high blood
pressure. When a defect develops, blood pressure can
force the tear to open and allow blood to pass through.
Since the blood is under pressure, it eventually splits
(dissecting) the middle layer of the blood vessel, creat-
ing a new channel for blood. The length of the channel
grows over time and can result in the closing off of
connection points to other arteries. This can lead to
heart attack, strokes, abdominal pain, and nerve
damage. Blood may leak from the dissection and col-
lect in the chest an around the heart.
A second mechanism leading to aortic dissection
is medial hemorrhage. A medial hemorrhage occurs in
the middle layer of the blood vessel and spills through
the inner lining of the aorta wall. This opening then
allows blood from the aorta to enter the vessel wall
and begin a dissection. Approximately 2,000 cases of
aortic dissection occur yearly in the United States.
Causes and symptoms
Aortic dissection is caused by a deterioration of
the inner lining of the aorta. There are a number of
conditions that predispose a person to develop defects
of the inner lining, including high blood pressure,
Marfan’s disease,Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, connective
tissue diseases, and defects of heart development
which begin during fetal development. A dissection
can also occur accidentally following insertion of a
catheter, trauma, or surgery. The main symptom is sud-
den, intense pain. The pain can be so intense as to
immobilize the patient and cause him to fall to the
ground. The pain is frequently felt in both the chest
and in the back, between the shoulder blades. The extent
of the pain isproportional tothe lengthof the dissection.
Diagnosis
The pain experienced by the patient is the first
symptom of aortic dissection and is unique. The pain is
usually described by the patient as ‘‘tearing, ripping, or
stabbing.’’ This is in contrastto the pain associated with
heart attacks. The patient frequently has a reduced or
absent pulse in the extremities. A murmur may be heard
if the dissection is close to the heart. An enlarged aorta
will usually appear in the chest x rays and ultrasound
KEY TERMS
Dissection— A cut or divide.
Hemorrhage— A large discharge of blood, profuse
bleeding.
Aortic dissection
exams of most patients. The use of a blood dye in angio-
grams and/or CT scans (computed tomography scans)
will aid in diagnosing and visualizing the dissection.
Treatment
Because of the potentially fatal nature of aortic
dissection, patients are treated immediately. Drugs are
administered to reduce the blood pressure and heart
rate. If the dissection is small, drug therapy alone may
be used. In other cases, surgery is performed. In sur-
gery, damaged sections of the aorta are removed and a
synthetic graft is often used to reconstruct the
damaged vessel.
Prognosis
Depending on the nature and extent of the dissec-
tion, death can occur within a few hours of the start of
a dissection. Approximately 75% of untreated people
die within two weeks of the start of a dissection. Of
those who are treated, 40% survive more than 10
years. Patients are usually given long term treatment
with drugs to reduce their blood pressure, even if they
have had surgery.
Resources
BOOKS
Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, editors.The
Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998.
John T. Lohr, PhD
Aortic incompetence see Aortic valve
insufficiency
Aortic regurgitation see Aortic valve
insufficiency
Aortic stenosis see Aortic valve stenosis
Aortic valve insufficiency
Definition
The aortic valve separates the left ventricle of the
heart (the heart’s largest pumping chamber) from the
aorta, the large artery that carries oxygen-rich blood out
of the left ventricle to the rest of the body. In aortic valve
insufficiency, the aortic valve becomes leaky, causing
blood to flow backwards into the left ventricle.
Description
Aortic valve insufficie ncy occurs when this
valve cannot properly close after blood that is leav-
ing the heart’s left ventricle enters the aorta. With
each contraction of the heart more and more blood
flows back into the left ventricle, causing the ven-
tricle to become overfilled. This larger-than-normal
amount of blood that collects in the left ventricle
puts pressure on the walls of the heart, causing the
heart muscle to increase in thickness (hypertrophy).
If this thickening continues, the heart can be per-
manently damaged.
Aorticvalveinsufficiencyisalsoknowasaorticvalve
regurgitation because of the abnormal reversed flow of
blood leaking through the poorly functioning valve.
Causes and symptoms
The faulty working of the aortic valve can be
caused by a birth defect; by abnormal widening
of the aorta (which can be caused by very high blood
pressure and a variety of other less common condi-
tions); by various diseases that cause large amounts of
swelling (inflammation) in different areas of the body,
like rheumatic fever; and, although rarely, by the sexu-
ally transmitted disease,syphilis.
Normal
blood flow
Diseased valve
Blood backflow
A human heart with a diseased valve that doesn’t open and
close properly, allowing blood to backflow to the heart.
(Illustration by Argosy, Inc.)
368 Aortic valve insufficiency
About 75% of people with aortic valve insuffi-
ciency are men. Rheumatic (inflammatory) diseases
have been the main cause of this condition in both
men and women.
Aortic valve insufficiency can remain unnoticed
for 10 to 15 years. In cases of severe insufficiency a
person may notice a variety of symptoms, including an
uncomfortable pounding of the heart when lying
down, a very rapid or hard heart beat (palpitations),
shortness of breath, chest pain, and if untreated for
very long times, swelling of the liver, ankles, and belly.
Diagnosis
A poorly functioning or insufficient aortic valve
can be identified when a doctor listens to the heart
during aphysical examination.A chest x ray,a ne l e c -
trocardiogram (ECG, an electrical printout of the heart
beats), as well as an echocardiogram (a test that uses
sound waves to create an image of the heart and its
valves), can further evaluate or confirm the condition.
Treatment
Aortic insufficiency is usually corrected by having
the defective valve surgically replaced. However, such
an operation is done in severe cases. Before the condi-
tion worsens, certain drugs can be used to help manage
this condition.
Drugs that remove water from the body, drugs
that lower blood pressure, and drugs that help the
heart beat more effectively can each be used for this
condition. Reducing the amount of salt in the diet also
helps lower the amount of fluid the body holds and can
help the heart to work more efficiently as well.
In cases of a severely malfunctioning valve that
has been untreated for a long time, surgery is the
treatment of choice, especially if the heart is not func-
tioning normally. Human heart valves can be replaced
with man-made valves or with valves taken from pig
hearts.
Prognosis
Although drug treatment can help put off the need
for surgical valve replacement, it is important to
replace the faulty valve before the heart muscle itself
is damaged beyond recovery.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Condos Jr., William R. ‘‘Decade-old Heart Drug May Have a
New Use.’’San Diego Business Journal18 (21 July 1997): 24.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,
TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://
www.americanheart.org>.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Dominic De Bellis, PhD
Aortic valve stenosis
Definition
When aortic valve stenosis occurs, the aortic
valve, located between the aorta and left ventricle of
the heart, is narrower than normal size.
Description
A normal aortic valve, when open, allows the free
flow of blood from the left ventricle to the aorta. When
the valve narrows, as it does with stenosis, blood flow
is impeded. Because it is more difficult for blood
to flow through the valve, there is increased strain on
the heart. This can cause the left ventricle to enlarge
and malfunction, resulting in reduced blood supply to
the heart muscle and body, as well as fluid build up in
the lungs.
Cause and symptoms
Aortic valve stenosis can occur because of a birth
defect in the formation of the valve. Calcium deposits
may form on the valve withaging, causing the valve to
become stiff and narrow. Stenosis can also occur as a
result of rheumatic fever. Mild aortic stenosis may
produce no symptoms at all. The most common symp-
toms, depending on the severity of the disease, are
chest pain, blackouts, and difficulty breathing.
KEY TERMS
Rheumatic fever— A disease believed to be caused
by a bacterium named group A streptococcus. This
bacterium causes a sore ‘‘strep throat’’ and can also
result in fever. Infection by this bacterium can also
damage the heart and its valves, but how this takes
place is not clearly understood.
Aortic valve stenosis
Diagnosis
Using a stethoscope, a physician may hear a mur-
mur and other abnormal heart sounds. An ECG, also
called an electrocardiogram, records the electrical
activity of the heart. This technique andchest x ray
can show evidence that the left ventricle is enlarged.
An x ray can also reveal calcium deposits on the valve,
as well as congestion in the lungs.Echocardiography
can pick up thickening of the valve, heart size, and
whether or not the valve is working properly. This is
a procedure in which high frequency sound waves
harmlessly bounce off organs in the body. Cardiac
catheterization, in which a contrast dye is injected in
an artery using a catheter, is the key tool to confirm
stenosis and gauge its severity.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the symptoms and how
the heart’s function is affected. The valve can be
opened without surgery by using a balloon catheter,
but this is often a temporary solution. The proce-
dure involves inserting a deflated balloon at the end
of a catheter through the arteries to the valve.
Inflating the balloon should widen the valve. In
severe stenosis, heart valve replacement is recom-
mended, most often involving open-heart surgery.
The valve can be replaced with a mechanical valve,
a valve from a pig, or by moving the patient’s other
heart valve (pulmonary) into the position of the
aortic valve and then replacing the pulmonary
valve with an mechanical one. Anyone with aortic
stenosis needs to take antibiotics (amoxicillin, ery-
thromycin, or clindamycin) before dental and some
other surgical procedures, to prevent a heart valve
infection.
Prognosis
The prognosis for aortic valve stenosis depends on
the severity of the disease. With surgical repair, the
disease is curable. Patients suffering mild stenosis can
usually lead a normal life; a minority of the patients
progress to severe disease. Anyone with moderate
stenosis should avoid vigorous physical activity.
Most of these patients end up suffering some kind of
coronary heart disease over a 10 year period. Because
it is a progressive disease, moderate and severe stenosis
will be treated ultimately with surgery. Severe disease,
if left untreated, leads to death within 2 to 4 years once
the symptoms start.
Prevention
There is no way to prevent aortic stenosis.
Resources
BOOKS
Bender, Jeffrey R. ‘‘Heart Valve Disease.’’ InYale University
School of Medicine Heart Book, edited by Barry L.
Zaret, et al. New York: HearstBooks, 1992.
A close-up view of a calcified stenosis of the aortic valve.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Aorta— The largest artery in the body, which
moves blood from the left ventricle to the rest of
the body.
ECG— Also called an electrocardiogram, it records
the electrical activity of the heart.
Echocardiogram— A procedure in which high fre-
quency sound waves harmlessly bounce off organs
in the body providing an image so one can deter-
mine their structure and function.
Cardiac catheterization— A procedure in which
dye is injected through a tube or catheter into an
artery to more easily observe valves or blood ves-
sels seen on an x ray.
Left ventricle— One of the lower chambers of the
heart, which pumps blood to the aorta.
Murmur— An abnormal heart sound that can
reflect a valve dysfunction.
Rheumatic fever— A bacterial infection that often
causes heart inflammation.
Pulmonary valve— The valve located between the
pulmonary artery and the right ventricle, which
brings blood to the lungs.
370 Aortic valve stenosis
OTHER
‘‘Aortic Stenosis.’’Ochsner Heart and VascularInstitute.
<http://www.ochsner.org/pedcard/as.htm>.
Rahimtoola, Aly. ‘‘Aortic Stenosis.’’Loyola University
Health System Page.<http://www.luhs.org>.
Jeanine Barone, Physiologist
Apgar testing
Definition
Apgar testing is the assessment of the newborn
rating color, heart rate, stimulus response, muscle
tone, and respirations on a scale of zero to two, for a
maximum possible score of 10. It is performed twice,
first at one minute and then again at five minutes after
birth.
Purpose
Apgar scoring was originally developed in the
1950s by the anesthesiologist Virginia Apgar to assist
practitioners attending a birth in deciding whether or
not a newborn was in need of resuscitation. Using a
scoring method fosters consistency and standardiza-
tion among different practitioners. A February 2001
study published in the New England Journal of
Medicine investigated whether Apgar scoring con-
tinues to be relevant. Researchers concluded that
‘‘The Apgar scoring system remains as relevant for
the prediction of neonatal survival today as it was
almost 50 years ago.’’
Description
The five areas are scored as follows:
/C15Appearance, or color: 2 if the skin is pink all over; 1
for acrocyanosis, where the trunk and head are pink,
but the arms and legs are blue; and 0 if the whole
body is blue. Newborns with naturally darker skin
color will not be pink. However, pallor is still notice-
able, especially in the soles and palms. Color is
related to the neonate’s ability to oxygenate its
body and extremities, and is dependent on heart
rate and respirations. A perfectly healthy newborn
will often receive a score of 9 because of some blue-
ness in the hands and feet.
/C15Pulse (heart rate): 2 for a pulse of 100+ beats per
minute (bpm); 1 for a pulse below 100 bpm; 0 for no
pulse. Heart rate is assessed by listening with a
stethoscope to the newborn’s heart and counting
the number of beats.
/C15Grimace, or reflex irritability: 2 if the neonate
coughs, sneezes, or vigorously cries in response to a
stimulus (such as the use of nasal suctioning, stroking
the back to assess for spinal abnormalities, or having
the foot tapped); 1 for a slight cry or grimace in
response to the stimulus; 0 for no response.
/C15Activity, or muscle tone: 2 for vigorous movements
of arms and legs; 1 for some movement; 0 for no
movement, limpness.
/C15Respirations: 2 for visible breathing and crying; 1
for slow, weak, irregular breathing; 0 for apnea,
or no breathing. A crying newborn can ade-
quately oxygenate its lungs. Respirations are best
assessed by watching the rise and fall of the neo-
nate’s abdomen, as inf ants are diaphragmatic
breathers.
The combined first letters in these five areas spell
Apgar.
Preparation
No preparation is needed to perform the test.
However, while being born the neonate may receive
nasal and oral suctioning to remove mucus and
amniotic fluid. This may be done when the head of
the newborn is safely out, while the mother rests
before she continues to push.
Aftercare
Since the test is primarily observational in nature,
no aftercare is needed. However, the test may flag the
need for immediate intervention or prolonged
observation.
Normal results
The maximum possible score is 10, the minimum
is zero. It is rare to receive a true 10, as some acrocya-
nosis in the newborn is considered normal, and there-
fore not a cause for concern. Most infants score
between 7 and 10. These infants are expected to have
an excellent outcome. A score of 4, 5, or 6 requires
immediate intervention, usually in the form of oxygen
and respiratory assistance, or perhaps just suctioning
if breathing has been obstructed by mucus. While
suctioning is being done, a source of oxygen may be
placed near, but not over the newborn’s nose and
mouth. This form of oxygen is referred to asblow-by.
A score in the 4-6 range indicates that the neonate is
having some difficulty adapting to extrauterine life.
Apgar testing
This may be due to medications given to the mother
during a difficult labor, or at the very end of labor,
when these medications have an exaggerated effect on
the neonate.
Abnormal results
With a score of 0-3, the newborn is unresponsive,
apneic, pale, limp and may not have a pulse.
Interventions to resuscitate will begin immediately.
The test is repeated at five minutes after birth and
both scores are documented. Should the resuscitation
effort continue into the five-minute time period, inter-
ventions will not stop in order to perform the test. The
one-minute score indicates the need for intervention at
birth. It addresses survival and prevention of birth-
related complications resulting from inadequate
oxygen supply. Poor oxygenation may be due to
inadequate neurological and/or chemical control of
respiration. The five-minute score appears to have a
more predictive value for morbidity and normal devel-
opment, although research studies on this are incon-
sistent in their conclusions.
Resources
BOOKS
Feinbloom, Richard I.Pregnancy, Birth and the EarlyMonths.
Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing, 2000.
KEY TERMS
Acrocyanosis— A slight cyanosis, or blueness of the
hands and feet of the neonate is considered normal.
This impaired ability to fully oxygenate the extre-
mities is due to an immature circulatory system
which is still in flux.
Amniotic fluid— The protective bag of fluid that
surrounds the fetus while growing in the uterus.
Neonate— A term referring to the newborn infant,
from birth until one month of age.
Neonatologist— A physician who specializes in
problems of newborn infants.
Pallor— Extreme paleness in the color of the skin.
D R . V I R G I N I A A P G A R (1909–1974)
(AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced by permission.)
As one of very few female medical students at
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons
in New York during the early 1930s and one of the first
women to graduate from its medical school, Apgar knew
that her goal of becoming a surgeon would not be
achieved easily in a male-dominated profession.
Reluctantly, she switched her medical specialty to anes-
thesiology, she embraced her new field with typical intel-
ligence and energy. At this time, anesthesiology was a
relatively new field, having been left by the doctors
mostly to the attention of nurses. Apgar realized immedi-
ately how much in need of scientifically trained personnel
was this significant part of surgery, and she set out to
make anesthesiology a separate medical discipline. By
1937, she had become the fiftieth physician to be certified
as an anesthesiologist in the United States. The following
year she was appointed director of anesthesiology at the
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, becoming the
first woman to head a department at that institution.
As the attending anesthesiologist who assisted in the
delivery of thousands of babies during these years, Apgar
realized that infants had died from respiratory or circula-
tory complications that early treatment could have pre-
vented. Apgar decided to bring her considerable research
skills to this childbirth dilemma, and her careful study
resulted in her publication of the Apgar Score System
in 1952.
Apgar testing
Pillitteri, Adele.Maternal & Child Nursing; Care ofthe
Childbearing and Childrearing Family.3rd ed.
Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1999.
PERIODICALS
Casey, B. M., D. D. McIntire, and K. J. Leveno. ‘‘The
Continuing Value of Apgar Score for the Assessment of
Newborn Infants’’.NewEngland Journal of Medicine
344 (February 15, 2000): 467-71.
OTHER
Apgar, Virginia.A Proposal for a New Method of Evaluation
of the Newborn Infant.<http://www.apgarfamily.com/
Apgar_Paper.html>.
The National Childbirth Trust. <http://
www.nctpregnancyandbabycare.com>.
PregnancyWeekly.com <http://
www.pregnancyweekly.com>.
Esther Csapo Rastegari, RN, BSN, EdM
Aphasia
Definition
Aphasia is condition characterized by either par-
tial or total loss of the ability to communicate verbally
or using written words. A person with aphasia may
have difficulty speaking, reading, writing, recognizing
the names of objects, or understanding what other
people have said. Aphasia is caused by a brain injury,
as may occur during a traumatic accident or when
the brain is deprived of oxygen during astroke.I t
may also be caused by abrain tumor, a disease such
as Alzheimer’s, or an infection, like encephalitis.
Aphasia may be temporary or permanent. Aphasia
does not include speech impediments caused by loss
of muscle control.
Description
To understand and use language effectively, an
individual draws upon word memory–stored informa-
tion on what certain words mean, how to put them
together, and how and when to use them properly. For
a majority of people, these and other language func-
tions are located in the left side (hemisphere) of the
brain. Damage to this side of the brain is most com-
monly linked to the development of aphasia.
Interestingly, however, left-handed people appear to
have language areas in both the left and right hemi-
spheres of the brain and, as a result, may develop
aphasia from damage to either side of the brain.
Stroke is the most common cause of aphasia in the
United States. Approximately 500,000 individuals suf-
fer strokes each year, and 20% of these individuals
develop some type of aphasia. Other causes of brain
damage include head injuries, brain tumors, and infec-
tion. About half of the people who show signs of apha-
sia have what is called temporary or transient aphasia
and recover completely within a few days. An estimated
one million Americans suffer from some form of per-
manent aphasia. As yet, no connection between aphasia
and age, gender, or race has been found.
Aphasia is sometimes confused with other condi-
tions that affect speech, such as dysarthria and
apraxia. These condition affect the muscles used in
speaking rather than language function itself.
Dysarthria is a speech disturbance caused by lack of
control over the muscles used in speaking, perhaps due
to nerve damage. Speech apraxia is a speech distur-
bance in which language comprehension and muscle
control are retained, but the memory of how to use the
muscles to form words is not.
Broca's area
Wernicke's area
Broca’s aphasia results from damage to the frontal lobe of the
language-dominant area of the brain. Individuals with
Broca’s aphasia may become mute or may be able to use
single-word statements or full sentences, although it may
require great effort. Wernicke’s aphasia is caused by damage
to the temporal lobe of the language-dominant area of the
brain. People with this condition speak in long, uninterrupted
sentences, but the words used are often unnecessary and
unintelligible. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Aphasia
Causes and symptoms
Aphasia can develop after an individual sustains
a brain injury from a stroke, head trauma, tumor, or
infection, such as herpes encephalitis. As a result of
this injury, the pathways for language comprehen-
sion or production are disrupted or destroyed. For
most people, this means damage to the left hemi-
sphere of the brain. (In 95 to 99% of right-handed
people, language centers are in the left hemisphere,
and up to 70% of left-handed people also have left-
hemisphere language dominance.) According to the
traditional classification scheme, each form of
aphasia is caused by damage to a different part of
the left hemisphere of the brain. This damage affects
one or more of the basic language functions: speech,
naming (the ability to identify an object, color, or
other item with an appropriate word or term), repe-
tition (the ability to repeat words, phrases, and sen-
tences), hearing comprehension (the ability to
understand spoken language), reading (the ability
to understand written words and their meaning),
and writing (the ability to communicate and record
events with text).
The traditional classification scheme includes
eight types of aphasia:
/C15Broca’s aphasia, also called motor aphasia, results
from damage to the front portion or frontal lobe of
the language-dominant area of the brain. Individuals
with Broca’s aphasia may be completely unable to
use speech (mutism) or may be able to use single-
word statements or even full sentences, though
these sentences may require a great deal of effort to
construct. Small words, such as conjunctions (and,
or, but) and articles (the, an, a), may be omitted,
leading to a ‘‘telegraph’’ quality in their speech.
Hearing comprehension is usually not affected, so
they are able to understand other people’s speech
and conversation and can follow commands. Often,
KEY TERMS
Anomic aphasia— A condition characterized by
either partial or total loss of the ability to recall the
names of persons or things as a result of a stroke,
head injury, brain tumor, or infection.
Broca’s aphasia—A condition characterized by either
partial or total loss of the ability to express oneself,
either through speech or writing. Hearing comprehen-
sion is not affected. This condition may result from a
stroke, head injury, brain tumor, or infection.
Computed tomography (CT)— An imaging techni-
que that uses cross-sectional x rays of the body to
create a three-dimensional image of the body’s inter-
nal structures.
Conduction aphasia— A condition characterized by
the inability to repeat words, sentences, or phrases as
a result of a stroke, head injury, brain tumor, or
infection.
Frontal lobe— The largest, most forward-facing part
of each side or hemisphere of the brain.
Global aphasia— A condition characterized by either
partial or total loss of the ability to communicate verb-
ally or using written words as a result of widespread
injury to the language areasof the brain. This condition
may be caused by a stroke, head injury, brain tumor,
or infection. The exact language abilities affected vary
depending on the location and extent of injury.
Hemisphere— One of the two halves or sides-the left
and the right-of the brain.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)— An imaging
technique that uses a large circular magnet and
radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the
body. These signals are used to construct images of
internal structures.
Subcortical aphasia— A condition characterized by
either partial or total loss of the ability to commu-
nicate verbally or using written words as a result of
damage to non language-dominated areas of the
brain. This condition may be caused by a stroke,
head injury, brain tumor, or infection.
Temporal lobe— The part of each side or hemisphere
of the brain that is on the side of the head, nearest the
ears.
Transcortical aphasia— A condition characterized
by either partial or total loss of the ability to commu-
nicate verbally or using written words that does not
affect an individual’s ability to repeat words,
phrases, and sentences.
Wernicke’s aphasia— A condition characterized by
either partial or total loss of the ability to understand
what is being said or read. The individual maintains
the ability to speak, but speech may contain unne-
cessary or made-up words.
374 Aphasia