DISEASE: Chickenpox
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

proven as risk factors for certain cancers can help
lower one’s risk. For instance, while physicians have
long known a small increased risk for breast cancer
was linked to use of HRT, a landmark study released
in 2003 proved the risk was greater than thought. The
Women’s Health Initiative found that even relatively
short-term use of estrogen plus progestin is associated
with increased risk of breast cancer, diagnosis at a
more advanced stage of the disease, and a higher
number of abnormal mammograms. The longer a
woman used HRT, the more her risk increased.
Resources
BOOKS
Simone, Joseph V. ‘‘Oncology: Introduction.’’ InCecil
Textbook of Medicine, edited by Russel L. Cecil, et al.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 2000.
PERIODICALS
‘‘HRT Linked to Higher Breast Cancer Risk, Later
Diagnosis, Abnormal Mammograms.’’Women’s
Health WeeklyJuly 17, 2003: 2.
‘‘New Way to Stop Cancer Cell Growth Described.’’Gene
Therapy WeeklyDecember 12, 2002: 9.
‘‘Researchers Find New Way to Trigger Self-Destruction of
Certain Cancer Cells.’’Biotech WeekJuly 16, 2003: 285.
‘‘Technique Streamlines Search for Anticancer Drugs.’’
Cancer WeeklyApril 15, 2003: 62.
‘‘Virus Therapy Attacks Cancer Cells.’’Cancer WeeklyJuly
29, 2003: 50.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Cancer Society . 1599 Clifton Road, N.E. Atlanta,
GA 30329 (800) 227-2345. <http://www.cancer.org>.
Cancer Research Institute (National Headquarters). 681,
Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10022 (800) 992-2623.
<http://www.cancerresearch.org>.
National Cancer Institute. 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 31,
room 10A16, Bethesda, Maryland, 20892 (800)422-
6237. <http://wwwicic.nci.nih.gov>.
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
Teresa G. Odle
Cancer chemotherapy drugs see
Anticancer drugs
Cancer therapy, definitive
Definition
Definitive cancer therapy is a treatment plan
designed to potentially cure cancer using one or a
combination of interventions including surgery, radia-
tion, chemical agents, or biological therapies.
Purpose
The primary purpose of definitive care is to estab-
lish a cure and to destruct and remove all cancer cells
from the infected person.
Surgery is not only a diagnostic tool, but also used
for tumor removal. The surgeon usually identifies
potential candidates for tumor removal and repairs
intraoperatively (during the operation procedure).
Surgery can be curative for some stomach, genital/
urinary, thyroid, breast, skin, and central nervous
system cancers. The best chance for a surgical cure is
usually with the first operation. It is essential that the
cancer surgeon (oncologic surgeon) be experienced in
the specific procedure.
Radiation therapy is commonly administered to
approximately 50% of cancer patients during the
course of illness. It can be used as the sole method of
cure for tumors in the mouth and neighboring struc-
tures in the oral cavity, vagina, prostate, cervix, eso-
phagus, Hodgkin’s disease, and certain types of cancer
in the spinal cord and brain. Research and clinical
trials have demonstrated that combination treatment
is more effective than radiation therapy alone.
Chemotherapy is curative for only a small percen-
tage of cancers. It is most effective forchoriocarci-
noma, cancer of the testis, some types of lymphomas,
and cancer of skeletal muscles.
Biological therapies are a new and promising
direction for cancer cures. Usually when cancer cells
grow they manage to derive a blood supply that allows
passage of nutrients promoting continuation of
abnormal cancer growth. Research that focuses on
destroying these blood vessels is called angiogenesis.
Cutting off the blood supply has been shown to
destroy tumors, since this stops the flow of essential
nutrients required for cancer growth. Use of certain
growth factors also can stimulate self-destructive
pathways in cancer cells (apoptosis).Gene therapyis
directed toward inhibiting specific cellular signals that
promote cancer cell multiplication. The importance of
gene therapy in coming years will likely increase as
scientists made progress in 2002 and 2003 are mapping
the human genes (The Human Genome Project) and
identifying new ways to fight and perhaps cure cancer.
By using genetics, they hope to find new ways to
activate human defenses against tumor cells and
delay viral attacks on cells. Many trials were underway
in 2003 that showed great promise. One of these in
Cancer therapy, definitive
2003 combined gene therapy and chemotherapy to
stop breast cancerand its spread (metastasis).
Precautions
Surgical resection requires an experienced sur-
geon, preoperative assessment, imaging studies, and
delicate operative technique. Care should be taken
during the procedure to avoid unnecessary tumor
manipulation, which can cause cancer cells to infiltrate
adjacent structures. If manipulation is excessive, cells
can enter nearby areas for future re-growth. Accurate
isolation of the tumor also can help avoid contamina-
tion of the surgical area. Early ligation of the blood
supply to the tumor is an essential component of a
surgical cure.
Radiation therapy requires extensive treatment
planning and imaging. Care must be taken to localize
the cancer field while attempting to spare destruction
of normal tissue. This requires image monitoring and
exact positioning during radiation treatment sessions.
Chemotherapy usually causes destruction of nor-
mal cells, and cancer cells can become immune to
chemical destruction. Side effects and patient toler-
ance issues typically are anticipated and dosages may
have to be specifically altered. Very few chemothera-
peutic agents offer curative responses.
Biological therapies may cause patient toxicity
resulting in extensive side effects. This can occur
since the optimal dose may be exceedingly elevated
above patient tolerance.
Description
Surgery
Surgical removal of the tumor must be per-
formed with care and accuracy. The surgeon must
avoid overmanipulation of the surgical field. Too
much movement within the area can cause cancer
cell displacement into surrounding tissue. If this
occurs and no further treatment is indicated, the
tumor may grow again. The surgeon also should per-
form an assessment concerning tissue removal
around the cancer site. Tissue around the site may
not by inspection seem cancerous, but adjacent struc-
tures may have cancer cells and surrounding tissue
removal is usually part of the operative procedure.
Pieces of tumor and the surrounding area are ana-
lyzed microscopically during the operation for cell
type. An adequate resection (removal of tissue) will
reveal normal cells in the specimens analyzed from
areas bordering the cancerous growth. Surgery also
can help to decrease the tumor bulk and, along with
other treatment measures, may provide a cure for
certain cancers. However, surgery is not always the
best answer. It generally works best on slow-growing
cancers.
Not only can surgery be curative for some can-
cers, but it is an essential diagnostic tool that must be
assessed intraoperatively since microscopic analysis
will guide the surgeon concerning tumor and sur-
rounding tissue removal. These diagnostic proce-
dures include an aspiration biopsy, which inserts a
needle to extract (aspirate) fluid contained inside a
cancerous growth; a needlebiopsy uses a specialized
needle to obtain a core tissue specimen; an incision
biopsy removes a section from a large tumor; and an
excision biopsy removes the entire tumor. The sur-
geon also can take samples of neighboring lymph
nodes. Cancer in surrounding lymph nodes is an
important avenue for distant spread of cancer to
other areas. If microscopic analysis determines the
presence of cancer cells inlymph nodes, the surgeon
may decide to perform a more aggressive surgical
approach.
Radiation therapy
Similar to surgical intervention, radiation therapy
is a localized treatment. It involves the administration
of ionizing radiation to a solid tumor location. This
generates reactive oxygen molecules, causing the
destruction of DNA in local cells. There are three
commonly used radiation therapy beams: gamma
rays from a linear accelerator machine produce a
focused beam; orthovoltage rays are of less energy,
thus penetrate less and typically deliver higher doses
to superficial tissues (efficient for treating skin can-
cers); and megavoltage rays are high energy producing
beams that can penetrate deeply situated internal
organs, while sparing extensive skin damage. Two
common routes can deliver radiation. Brachytherapy
delivers radiation to a local area by placing radioactive
materials within close proximity to the cancerous site.
Teletherapy delivers radiation to a specific area using
an external beam machine.
Chemotherapy
Curative chemotherapy usually requires multiple
administrations of the chemical agent. Chemotherapy
or systemic therapy is administered in the blood and
circulates through the entire body. The choice of
chemotherapeutic agents depends on the specific type
of cancer. Chemotherapy is more commonly used for
metastatic (malignant cancer which has spread to
710 Cancer therapy, definitive
other areas beyond the primary site of cancer growth)
disease, since very few cancers are cured by systemic
therapy.
Biologic therapy
Biologic therapies primarily function to alter the
patient’s response to cancer. These treatments are
mostly investigations and there are numerous
research protocols studying the effects of biologic
treatments. These protocols usually have strict
admission criteria that may exclude potential candi-
dates who can benefit from treatment. These treat-
ments tend to stimulate specific immune cells or
immune chemicals to destroy cancer cells.
Preparation
For all treatment modalities imaging studies,
biopsy, and constant blood analysis is essential before,
during, and after treatments. Surgical candidates
should undergo extensive pre-operative evaluation
with imaging studies, blood chemistry analysis, stabi-
lized health status, and readiness of staff for any
potential complications and cell biopsy analysis.
Patients with other pre-existing chronic disease may
require intensive post-operative monitoring.
For radiotherapy, the patient undergoes extensive
imaging studies. Additional planning strategies
include beam localization to spare normal tissues,
calibration of fractionated doses, and specific posi-
tioning during treatment sessions.
Patients who receive curative chemotherapy
should be informed of possible side effects associated
with the chemotherapeutic agent. Patients should also
be informed of temporary lifestyle changes and medi-
cations that may offer some symptomatic relief.
Patients undergoing biologic therapies are usually
advised of potential side effects, treatment cycles and
specific tests for monitoring progress according to the
specific research protocol.
Aftercare
Patients will typically be evaluated by imaging
studies, blood analysis, physical examination,a n d
health improvement. These follow-up visits usually
occur at specific time intervals during the course of
treatment. Surgical patients may require closer obser-
vation during the initial post-operative period to avoid
potential complications.Reconstructive surgerycan be
considered to improve appearance and restore func-
tion. Certain surgical procedures (such as flaps and
microsurgery of blood vessels) can restore new tissues
to a previous surgery site.
Risks
Surgical risks
Surgical therapy can be both disfiguring and dis-
abling. Many normal tissues can be adversely affected
by radiation therapy. Side effects that commonly
occur shortly after a treatment cycle includenausea,
vomiting, fatigue, loss of appetite, and bone marrow
suppression (a decrease in the cells that provide
defense against infections and those that carry oxygen
to cells).
Radiation risks
Radiation therapy also can cause difficulty swal-
lowing, oral gum disease, anddry mouth. Additionally,
radiation therapy can cause damage to local structures
within the irradiated field.
Chemotherapy risks
Chemotherapy commonly causes bone marrow
suppression. Additionally, cells called platelets—
important for normal blood clotting—may be signifi-
cantly lowered, causing patients to bleed. This may be
problematic enough to limit the treatment course.
Bone marrow suppression can increase susceptibility
to infection and also causeinfertility. Patients com-
monly have bouts ofnausea and vomitingshortly after
a treatment session. Rapidly multiplying normal cells
also are affected such as skin cells (causing blistering
and ulceration) and hair cells causing loss of hair, a
condition calledalopecia).
Biologic therapy risks
Biologic therapies can cause patients to develop
suppression of cells that help the body fight against
KEY TERMS
Bone marrow suppression— A decrease in cells
responsible for providing immunity, carrying
oxygen, and those responsible for normal blood
clotting.
DNA— The molecule responsible for cell
multiplication.
Titrate— To analyze the best end point (for dose)
for a medication.
Cancer therapy, definitive
infection. Administration of certain chemicals that
have anticancer effects can cause heart damage.
Injection of killer immune cells (lymphokine-activated
killer cells) may cause bone marrow suppression, and
the host may reject the newly introduced cells.
Resources
BOOKS
Abeloff, Martin D., et al.Clinical Oncology.2nd ed.
Churchill Livingstone, Inc, 2000.
Goroll, Allan H., et al, editors.Primary Care Medicine.
4th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
PERIODICALS
‘‘Gene Therapy and Chemotherapy Combine to Stop Breast
Cancer and its Metastasis.’’Gene Therapy Weekly
October 30, 2003: 2.
‘‘Surgery Not Always Best Cancer Treatment Option:
Weigh Advantages and Disadvantages Before
Decision.’’ Patient Education ManagementJuly
2003: 78.
Wachter, Kerri. ‘‘Gene Therapy Holds Promise for Curing
Cancer: Four Preliminary Trials.’’Internal Medicine
News September 15, 2003: 22.
OTHER
American Cancer Society.<http://www.cancer.org>.
National Cancer Institute.<http://cnetdb.nci.nih.gov/
cancerlit.shtml.>.
Laith Farid Gulli, M.D.
Nicole Mallory, M.S.
Teresa G. Odle
Cancer therapy, palliative
Definition
Palliative cancer therapy is treatment specifically
directed to help improve the symptoms associated
with terminal cancer.
Purpose
Palliative care is directed to improving symptoms
associated with incurable cancer. Care can include
surgery, radiation therapy , chemotherapy, sympto-
matic treatments resulti ng from cancer, and side
effects of treatment. The primary objective of pallia-
tive care is to improve the quality of the remainder of
a patient’s life. Treatment usually involves a combi-
nation of modalities (multimodality approach) and
numerous specialists typically are involved in the
treatment planning process. Therapeutic planning
usually involves careful coordination with the treat-
ment team. The approach to palliative care also
involves easing psychosocial problems and an
emphasis on the patient’s family.
Surgery can be utilized for palliation after careful
evaluation and planning. The use of surgery in these
cases may reduce the tumor bulk and help improve
the quality of life by relieving pain, alleviating
obstruction, or controlling bleeding. Radiation ther-
apy for terminal cancer patients can also alleviate
pain, bleeding, and obstruction of neighboring
areas. New research in 2003 showed that using a
combination of radiation therapy bisphosphanates
helped offer palliative relief to patients with meta-
static bone disease (metastatic disease is cancer that
has spread beyond the original site or organ to other
areas of the body). Chemotherapy may be helpful
to reduce tumor size and provide some reduction
to metastatic disease. L ong-term chemotherapy
patients develop drug resistance, a situation that ren-
ders chemotherapeutic treatments ineffective. If this
occurs, patients usually are given a second line med-
ication or, if admission criteria are met, they may
p a r t i c i p a t ei na ne x p e r i m e n t a lr e s e a r c hp r o t o c o l .
Palliative treatments and terminal cancer in combi-
nation can cause many symptoms that can become
problematic. These symptoms commonly include
pain, nausea, vomiting, difficulty in breathing,consti-
pation, dehydration, agitation, anddelirium. The pal-
liative treatment-planning goal focuses on reducing
these symptoms.
Precautions
Surgery fortumor removal, biopsy, or size reduc-
tion is associated with postoperative pain and local
nerve damage, which may be both severe and difficult
to alleviate. Chemotherapy and radiation therapy also
can produce nerve damage and severe pain.
Additionally, patients with malignant cancer are sus-
ceptible to infections like herpes,pneumonia, urinary
tract infections, and woundabscess, all of which can
cause severe pain. Pain associated with cancer and/or
treatments can significantly impair the patient’s abil-
ities to perform daily tasks and hence impair quality of
life. These complications may negatively impact the
patient’s psychological well-being.
Description
Pain is one of the common symptoms associated
with cancer. Approximately 75% of terminal cancer
patients have pain. Pain is a subjective symptom
712 Cancer therapy, palliative
and thus it cannot be measured using technological
approaches. Pain can be assessed using numeric scales
(from one to 10, one is rated as no pain while 10 is
severe) or rating specific facial expressions associated
with various levels of pain. The majority of cancer
patients experience pain as a result of tumor mass
that compresses neighboring nerves, bone, or soft tis-
sues, or from direct nerve injury (neuropathic pain).
Pain can occur from affected nerves in the ribs, mus-
cles, and internal structures such as the abdomen
(cramping type pain associated with obstruction).
Many patients also experience various types of pain
as a direct result of follow-up tests, treatments (sur-
gery, radiation, and chemo–therapy) and diagnostic
procedures (i.e., biopsy).
Preparation
Patients typically are informed that their diagno-
sis is terminal and treatments are directed to improve
quality of life an ease suffering for the remaining time.
Treatment also is aimed to minimize emotional suffer-
ing associated with pain.
A careful history is necessary to assess duration,
severity, and location of pain. Aphysical examination
may verify the presence of pain. Imaging analysis may
further confirm the presence of potential causes
of pain. The World Health Organization (WHO)
recommends an analgesic ladder. This treatment
approach provides medication selections based on
previous analgesic use and severity of pain. The ladder
starts with the use of non-opioid (non-morphine)
drugs such asaspirin, acetaminophen, or non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) for control
of mild pain. Chronic pain must be treated with con-
stant and consistently administered medication(s).
The ‘‘take as needed’’ approach is not advised.
Supplemental doses may be recommended in addition
to the standard dose for circumstances that may wor-
sen pain. Opioids (i.e., morphine and codeine) are the
medications of choice for moderate to severe pain.
Doses are adjusted to produce maximum pain relief
while minimizing side effects. These medications are
conveniently administered orally. Administering ster-
oids can help reducenausea and vomiting. Delirium
and anxiety may be improved by psychoactive
medications.
Aftercare
Care for palliation is continuous and consistent
f o rt h er e m a i n d e ro fl i f e .P a t i e n t sw h oh a v el e s st h a n
six months of life remaining may choose a hospice to
stop treatment and control pain. Nutritional care is
an important part of palliative care, since many
patients suffer malnourishing effects of radiation
and chemotherapy and those who can maintain plea-
sure from food should. A proper diet can offset
effects of the many medications patients on palliative
care may receive.
Risks
Patients taking opioids for pain relief can develop
tolerance and dependence. Tolerance develops when a
patient requires increasing amounts of medication to
produce pain reduction. Dependence shows character-
istic withdrawal symptoms if medications are abruptly
stopped. These symptoms can be avoided by tapering
down doses in the event that these medications should
be stopped.
Resources
BOOKS
Abeloff, Martin D., et al.Clinical Oncology.2nd ed.
Churchill Livingstone, Inc, 2000.
Goroll, Allan H., et al., editors.Primary Care Medicine.
4th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins. 2000.
Washington Manual of Medical Therapeutics.30th ed.
Washington University School of Medicine,
Department of Medicine, 2001.
PERIODICALS
‘‘Bisphosphanates, Radiation Therapy Can be Used for
Metastatic Bone Disease.’’Cancer WeeklyOctober 28,
2003: 112.
Cimino, James E. ‘‘The Role of Nutrition in Hospice and
Palliative Care of the Cancer Patient.’’Topics in Clinical
Nutrition July–September 2003: 154–158.
Mercadante, S., F. Fulfaro, and A. Casuccio. ‘‘The Impact
of Home Palliative Care on Symptoms in Advanced
Cancer Patients.’’Support Care CancerJuly 2000.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Cancer Society. <http://www.cancer.org>.
American Pain Society. <http://www.ampiansoc.org>.
National Cancer Institute. <http://cnetdb.nci.nih.gov/
cancerlit.shtml>.
KEY TERMS
Opioids— Narcotic pain killing medications.
World Health Organization (WHO)— An interna-
tional organization concerned with world health
and welfare.
Cancer therapy, palliative
OTHER
‘‘Improving Palliative Care for Cancer.’’ Report
and Booklet. Institute of Medicine, 2001. <http://
www.nap.edu/catalog/10790/html>.
Laith Farid Gulli, M.D.
Nicole Mallory, M.S.
Teresa G. Odle
Cancer therapy, supportive
Definition
Supportive cancer therapy is the use of medicines
to counteract unwanted effects of cancer treatment.
Purpose
Along with their beneficial effects, many cancer
treatments produce uncomfortable and sometimes
harmful side effects. For example, cancer drugs may
cause nausea or vomiting. They also may destroy red or
white blood cells, resulting in a low blood count.
Fortunately, many of these side effects can be relieved
with other medicines.
Description
Different kinds of drugs are used for different
purposes in supportive cancer therapy. To relievenau-
sea and vomiting, a physician may prescribe dolasetron
(Anzemet), granisetron (Kytril) or ondansetron
(Zofran). Drugs called colony stimulating factors are
used to help the bone marrow make new white blood
cells to replace those destroyed by cancer treatment.
Examples of colony stimulating factors are filgrastim
(Neupogen) and sargramostim (Leukine). Another
type of drug, epoetin (Epogen, Procrit), stimulates
the bone marrow to make new red blood cells and
help patients overcome anemia. It is a synthetically
made version of human erythropoietin that is made
naturally in the body and has the same effect on bone
marrow.
Some physicians who treat cancer recommend
that their patients use marijuana to relieve nausea
and vomiting. This practiceis controversial for sev-
eral reasons. Using marijuana, even for medicinal
purposes, is illegal in most states. Also, most of the
evidence that marijuana effectively relieves nausea
and vomiting comes from reports of people who
have used it, not from carefully designed scientific
studies called clinical trials. An oral medication
that contains one of the active ingredients of mari-
juana is available with a physician’s prescription and
s o m e t i m e si su s e dt ot r e a tn a u s e aa n dv o m i t i n gi n
patients undergoing cancer treatment. However, the
drug, dronabinol (Marinol), takes longer to work
than smoked marijuana and may be difficult for
patients with nausea and vomiting to swallow and
keep down.
In 1997, the National Institutes of Health issued a
report calling for more research into medical uses of
marijuana. The panel of experts who wrote the report
also recommended that researchers investigate other
ways of getting the active ingredients of marijuana
into the body, such as nasal sprays, skin patches and
inhalers. In 2000, the American Cancer Society funded
research into a skin patch. A 2003 report said
that a University of Kentucky researcher had applied
for a patent for the patch which used synthetic
cannabinoids.
Patients who want to use marijuana to relieve side
effects of cancer treatment should talk to their physi-
cians and should carefully consider the benefits and
risks, both medical and legal.
Recommended dosage
The recommended dosage depends on the type
of supportive cancer therapy. The physician who
prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the
prescription can recommend the correct dosage.
Precautions
Dolasetron, granisetron and ondansetron
If severe nausea and vomiting occur after taking
this medicine, patients should check with a physician.
The use of ondansetron after abdominal surgery
may cover up symptoms of stomach problems.
People with liver disease may be more likely to
have side effects from ondansetron.
Colony stimulating factors
Certain cancer drugs reduce the body’s ability to
fight infections. Although colony stimulating factors
help restore the body’s natural defenses, the process
takes time. Getting prompt treatment for infections is
important, even while taking this medicine. A patient
should call the physician at the first sign of illness or
infection, such as asore throat, fever or chills.
714 Cancer therapy, supportive
Seeing a physician regularly while taking this
medicine is important. This will give the physician a
chance to make sure the medicine is working and to
check for unwanted side effects.
People with certain medical conditions may have
problems if they take colony stimulating factors. In
people who havekidney disease, liver disease, or con-
ditions caused by inflammation or immune system
problems, colony stimulating factors may make these
problems worse. People with heart disease may be
more likely to have side effects such as water retention
and heart rhythm problems when they take these
drugs. And people with lung disease may be more
likely to haveshortness of breath. Anyone who has
any of these medical conditions should check with
his or her physician before using colony stimulating
factors.
Epoetin
This medicine may cause seizures (convulsions),
especially in people with a history of seizures. Anyone
who takes these drugs should not drive, use machines
or do anything else that might be dangerous if they
have had a seizure.
Epoetin helps the body make new red blood cells,
but it cannot do its job unless there is plenty of iron in
the body. The physician may recommend taking iron
supplements or certainvitamins that help get iron into
the body. Following the physician’s orders to make
sure the body has enough iron for this medicine makes
it work. Iron supplements should not be taken unless
they are prescribed by a physician.
In studies of laboratory animals, epoetin taken
during pregnancy caused birth defects , including
damage to the bones and spine. However, the drug
has not been reported to cause problems in human
babies whose mothers take it. Women who are preg-
nant or who may become pregnant should check
with their physicians for the most up-to-date informa-
tion on the safety of taking this medicine during
pregnancy.
People with certain medical conditions may have
problems if they take this medicine. For example, the
chance of side effects may be greater in people with
high blood pressure, heart or blood vessel disease or a
history ofblood clots. Epoetin may not work properly
in people who have bone problems or sickle cell
anemia.
Research continues on the benefits of epoetin as a
supportive cancer therapy. One 2003 report said new
research showed doubt as to its effectiveness in treat-
ing anemia, while other reports confirmed it worked
well. In mid-2003, a new large clinical trial (CREATE)
was beginning in England to help determine epoetin’s
effectiveness.
Dronabinol
This medicine contains sesame oil and one of the
active ingredients of marijuana. Anyone who has had
allergic or unusual reactions to sesame oil or mari-
juana products should let his or her physician know
before taking dronabinol.
Because dronabinol works on the central nervous
system, it may add to the effects of alcohol and other
drugs that slow down the central nervous system.
Examples of these drugs areantihistamines, cold med-
icine, allergy medicine, sleep aids, medicine for sei-
zures, tranquilizers, somepain relievers, and muscle
relaxants. Dronabinol also may add to the effects of
anesthetics, including those used for dental proce-
dures. Anyone taking dronabinol should not drink
alcohol and should check with his or her physician
before taking any of the drugs listed above.
This drug makes some people feel drowsy, dizzy,
lightheaded or ‘‘high,’’ with a sense of well-being.
Because of these possible reactions, anyone who
takes dronabinol should not drive, use machines or
do anything else that might be dangerous until they
have found out how the drug affects them. Thedizzi-
ness and lightheadedness are especially likely when
getting up after sitting or lying down. Getting up
gradually and holding onto something for support
should lessen the problem.
In laboratory studies, giving high doses of drona-
binol to pregnant animals increased the risk of the
unborn baby’sdeath. The medicine’s effects on preg-
nant women have not been studied. Women who are
pregnant or who may become pregnant should check
with their physicians before taking this medicine.
Dronabinol passes into breast milk and may
affect nursing babies whose mothers take the medi-
cine. Women who are breastfeeding their babies
should check with their physicians before using
dronabinol.
Because of its possible mind-altering effects, dro-
nabinol should be used with care in children and
older people. Both children and older people should
be watched carefully when they are taking this
medicine.
Using dronabinol may worsen some medical con-
ditions, including high blood pressure, heart disease,
bipolar disorderand schizophrenia.
Cancer therapy, supportive
General precautions for all types of supportive
cancer therapy
Anyone who previously has had unusual reactions
to drugs used in supportive cancer therapy should
let his or her physician know before taking the drugs
again. The physician should also be told about
any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other
substances.
Side effects
Dolasetron, granisetron and ondansetron
The most common minor side effects areheadache,
dizziness or lightheadedness, drowsiness,dry mouth,
diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain or stomach
cramps and unusual tiredness or weakness. These pro-
blems usually do not require medical treatment.
A physician should be notified as soon as possible
if fever occurs after taking granisetron.
If any of these symptoms occur after taking
ondansetron, the patient should check with a physi-
cian immediately:
/C15breathing problems orwheezing
/C15chest pain or tightness in chest
/C15skin rash,hives or itching
Colony stimulating factors
As this medicine starts to work, it may cause mild
pain in the lower back or hips. This is nothing to worry
about, and it will usually go away within a few days. If
the pain is too uncomfortable, the physician may pre-
scribe a painkiller. A physician needs to know if the
painkiller does not help.
Other possible side effects include headache, joint
or muscle pain, and skin rash or itching. These side
effects usually go away as the body adjusts to the
medicine and do not need medical treatment. If they
continue or interfere with normal activities, a physi-
cian should be notified.
Epoetin
This medicine may cause flu-like symptoms, such
as muscle aches, bone pain, fever, chills, shivering, and
sweating, within a few hours after it is taken. These
symptoms usually go away within 12 hours. If they do
not, or if they are troubling, a physician should be
told. Other possible side effects that do not need med-
ical attention are diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, and
tiredness or weakness.
Certain side effects should be brought to a physi-
cian’s attention as soon as possible. These include
headache, vision problems, increased blood pressure,
fast heartbeat, weight gain, and swelling of the face,
fingers, lower legs, ankles or feet.
Anyone who has chest pain or seizures after
taking epoetin should check with a physician
immediately.
Dronabinol
Side effects such as dizziness, drowsiness, confu-
sion and clumsiness or unsteadiness usually do not
need medical attention unless they are long-lasting or
they interfere with normal activities.
Other side effects or signs of overdose should have
immediate medical attention. These include:
/C15fast or pounding heartbeat
/C15constipation
/C15trouble urinating
/C15red eyes
/C15slurred speech
/C15mood changes, including depression, nervousness or
anxiety
/C15confusion
/C15forgetfulness
/C15changes in sight, smell, taste, touch or hearing
/C15a sense that time is speeding up or slowing down
/C15hallucinations
General advice on side effects for all types
of supportive cancer therapy
Other side effects are possible with any type of
supportive cancer therapy. Anyone who has unusual
symptoms during or after treatment with these drugs
should get in touch with his or her physician.
Interactions
Anyone who has supportive cancer therapy
should let the physician know all other medicines he
or she is taking. Some combinations of drugs may
interact, which may increase or decrease the effects
of one or both drugs or may increase the risk of side
effects. Patients should ask their physician if the pos-
sible interactions can interfere with drug therapy or
cause harmful effects.
716 Cancer therapy, supportive
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘CREATE Trial Providing Valuable Information on
Epoetin Treatment for Anemia.’’Hematology Week
August 25, 2003: 10.
‘‘Doubts Over Epoetin in Cancer.’’SCRIP World
Pharmaceutical NewsOctober 24, 2003: 24.
‘‘Researcher Working on Medical Patch to Deliver
Marijuana–like Drug.’’Cancer WeeklySeptember 9,
2003: 126.
Nancy Ross-Flanigan
Teresa G. Odle
Candida albicans infection see Candidiasis
Candidiasis
Definition
Candidiasis is an infection caused by a species of
the yeastCandida, usuallyCandida albicans.T h i si sa
common cause of vaginal infections in women. Also,
Candida may cause mouth infections in people with
reduced immune function, or in patients taking cer-
tain antibiotics. Candida can be found in virtually all
normal people but causes problems in only a fraction.
In recent years, however, several serious categories of
candidiasis have become more common, due to over-
use of antibiotics, the rise ofAIDS, the increase in
organ transplantations, and the use of invasive
devices (catheters, artificial joints and valves)—all
of which increase a patient’s susceptibility to
infection.
Description
Vaginal candidiasis
Over one million women in the United States
develop vaginal yeast infections each year. It is not
life-threatening, but it can be uncomfortable and
frustrating.
Oral candidiasis
This disorder, also known as thrush, causes white,
curd-like patches in the mouth or throat.
Deep organ candidiasis
Also known as invasive candidiasis, deep organ
candidiasis is a serious systemic infection that can
affect the esophagus, heart, blood, liver, spleen, kid-
neys, eyes, and skin. Like vaginal and oral candidiasis,
it is an opportunistic disease that strikes when a per-
son’s resistance is lowered, often due to another ill-
ness. There are many diagnostic categories of
deep organ candidiasis, depending on the tissues
involved.
Causes and symptoms
Vaginal candidiasis
Most women with vaginal candidiasis experience
severe vaginalitching. They also have a discharge that
often looks like cottage cheese and has a sweet or
bread-like odor. The vulva and vagina can be red,
swollen, and painful. Sexual intercourse can also be
painful.
KEY TERMS
Bipolar disorder— A severe mental illness in which
a person has extreme mood swings, ranging from a
highly excited state — sometimes with a false sense
of well-being — to depression
Bone marrow— Soft tissue that fills the hollow
centers of bones. Blood cells and platelets (disk-
shaped bodies in the blood that are important in
clotting) are produced in the bone marrow.
Hallucination— A false or distorted perception of
objects, sounds, or events that seems real.
Hallucinations usually result from drugs or mental
disorders.
Immune system— The body’s natural defenses
against disease and infection.
Inflammation— Pain, redness, swelling, and heat
that usually develop in response to injury or illness.
Schizophrenia— A severe mental disorder in
which people lose touch with reality and may
have illogical thoughts, delusions, hallucinations,
behavioral problems and other disturbances.
Sickle cell anemia— An inherited disorder in
which red blood cells contain an abnormal form
of hemoglobin, a protein that carries oxygen.
The abnormal form of hemoglobin causes the red
cells to become sickle- or crescent-shaped. The
misshapen cells may clog blood vessels, preventing
oxygen from reaching tissues and leading to
pain, blood clots and other problems. Sickle cell
anemia is most common in people of African des-
cent and in people from Italy, Greece, India, and
the Middle East.
Candidiasis
Oral candidiasis
Whitish patches can appear on the tongue, inside
of the cheeks, or the palate. Oral candidiasis typically
occurs in people with abnormal immune systems.
These can include people undergoingchemotherapy
for cancer, people taking immunosuppressive drugs
to protect transplanted organs, or people with HIV
infection.
Deep organ candidiasis
Anything that weakens the body’s natural barrier
against colonizing organisms—including stomach sur-
gery, burns, nasogastric tubes, and catheters—can pre-
dispose a person for deep organ candidiasis. Rising
numbers of AIDS patients, organ transplant recipi-
ents, and other individuals whose immune systems
are compromised help account for the dramatic
increase in deep organ candidiasis in recent years.
Patients with granulocytopenia (deficiency of white
blood cells) are particularly at risk for deep organ
candidiasis.
Diagnosis
Often clinical appearance gives a strong sugges-
tion about the diagnosis. Generally, a clinician will
take a sample of the vaginal discharge or swab an
area of oral plaque, and then inspect this material
under a microscope. Under the microscope, it is pos-
sible to see characteristic forms of yeasts at various
stages in the lifecycle.
Fungal blood cultures should be taken for
patients suspected of havingdeep organ candidiasis.
Tissue biopsy may be needed for a definitive
diagnosis.
Treatment
Vaginal candidiasis
In most cases, vaginal candidiasis can be treated
successfully with a varietyof over-the-counter anti-
fungal creams or suppositories. These include
Monistat, Gyne-Lotrimin, and Mycelex. However,
infections often recur. If a women has frequent
RACHEL FULLER BROWN
(1898–1980)
Rachel Fuller Brown was born on November 23,
1898 in Springfield, Massachusetts. Brown was the
oldest of two children born to Annie (Fuller) and
George Hamilton Brown. In 1912, her father left their
family in Missouri and her mother moved the family
back to Springfield. Brown double majored in history
and chemistry at Mount Holyoke, receiving her A.B.
degree in 1920. She also earned her M.A. degree from
the University of Chicago. Brown began her doctoral
studies at the University, but she experienced financial
difficulties and took a job before she received her
Ph.D. She worked at the Division of Laboratories and
Research of the New York State Department of Health
as an assistant chemist for seven years and finally
returned to Chicago and completed her Ph.D.
In 1948, Brown and Elizabeth Hazen began
researching fungal infections found in humans due to
antibiotic treatments and diseases. Some of the antibio-
tics they discovered did indeed kill the fungus; how-
ever, they also killed the test mice. Finally, Hazen
located a microorganism on a farm in Virginia, and
Brown’s tests indicated that the microorganism produced
two antibiotics, one of which proved effective for treat-
ing fungus and candidiasis in humans. Brown purified
the antibiotic which was patented under the name nys-
tatin. In 1954, the antibiotic became available in pill
form. Brown and Hazen continued their research and
discovered two other antibiotics. Brown received
numerous awards individually and with her research
partner, Elizabeth Hazen. Rachel Brown passed away
on January 14, 1980.
This patient’s tongue is infected with candidiasis.
(Photograph by Edward H. Gill, Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
718 Candidiasis
recurrences, she should consult her doctor about pre-
scription drugs such as Vagistat-1, Diflucan, and
others.
Oral candidiasis
This is usually treated with prescription lozenges
or mouthwashes. Some of the most-used prescriptions
are nystatin mouthwashes (Nilstat or Nitrostat) and
clotrimazole lozenges.
Deep organ candidiasis
The recent increase in deep organ candidiasis has
led to the creation of treatment guidelines, including,
but not limited to, the following: Catheters should be
removed from patients in whom these devices are still
present. Antifungal chemotherapy should be started
to prevent the spread of the disease. Drugs should be
prescribed based on a patient’s specific history and
defense status.
Alternative treatment
Home remedies for vaginal candidiasis include
vinegar douches or insertion of a paste made from
Lactobacillus acidophilus powder into the vagina. In
theory, these remedies will make the vagina more
acidic and therefore less hospitable to the growth of
Candida. Fresh garlic (Allium sativum) is believed to
have antifungal action, so incorporating it into the diet
or inserting a gauze-wrapped, peeled garlic clove into
the vagina may be helpful. The insert should be chan-
ged twice daily. Some women report success with these
remedies; they should try a conventional treatment if
an alternative remedy isn’t effective.
Prognosis
Vaginal candidiasis
Although most cases of vaginal candidiasis are
cured reliably, these infections can recur. To limit
recurrences, women may need to take a prescription
anti-fungal drug such as terconazole (sold as Terazol)
or take other anti-fungal drugs on a preventive basis.
Oral candidiasis
These infections can also recur, sometimes
because the infectingCandida develops resistance to
one drug. Therefore, a physician may need to prescribe
a different drug.
Deep organ candidiasis
The prognosis depends on the category of disease
as well as on the condition of the patient when the
infection strikes. Patients who are already suffering
from a serious underlying disease are more susceptible
to deep organ candidiasis that speads throughout
the body.
Prevention
Because Candida is part of the normal group of
microorganisms that co-exist with all people, it is
impossible to avoid contact with it. Good vaginal
hygiene and goodoral hygienemight reduce problems,
but they are not guarantees against candidiasis.
Because hospital-acquired (nosocomial) deep
organ candidiasis is on the rise, people need to be
made aware of it. Patients should be sure that catheters
A transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of Candida
albicans . (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by
permission.)
KEY TERMS
Biopsy— The removal and examination of tissue
from a live body.
Colonize— To become established in a host.
Granulocytopenia— A condition characterized by
a deficiency of white blood cells.
Nasogastric— Tube inserted through the nasal pas-
sages into the stomach.
Opportunistic— Infection caused by microorgan-
isms that are usually harmless, but which can
cause disease when a host’s resistance is lowered.
Systemic— Afflicting an entire body system or the
body in general.
Candidiasis
are properly maintained and used for the shortest pos-
sible time length. The frequency, length, and scope of
courses of antibiotic treatment should also be cut back.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Greenspan, Deborah, and John S. Greenspan.
‘‘HIV-Related Oral Disease.’’The Lancet348
(September 14, 1996): 729-734.
Richard H. Lampert
Candidosis see Candidiasis
Canker sores
Definition
Canker sores are small sores or ulcers that appear
inside the mouth. They are painful, self-healing, and
can recur.
Description
Canker sores occur on the inside of the mouth,
usually on the inside of the lips, cheeks, and/or soft
palate. They can also occur on the tongue and in the
throat. Often, several canker sores will appear at
the same time and may be grouped in clusters.
Canker sores appear as a whitish, round area with a
red border. The sores are painful and sensitive to
touch. The average canker sore is about one-quarter
inch in size, although they can occasionally be larger.
Canker sores are not infectious.
Approximately 20% of the U.S. population is
affected with recurring canker sores, and more
women than men get them. Women are more likely
to have canker sores during their premenstrual period.
Canker sores are sometimes confused with cold
sores. Cold sores are caused by herpes simplex virus.
This disease, also known as oral herpes orfever blis-
ters, can occur anywhere on the body. Most com-
monly, herpes infection occurs on the outside of the
lips and the gums, and much less frequently on the
inside the mouth. Cold sores are infectious.
Causes and symptoms
The exact cause of canker sores is uncertain, how-
ever, they seem to be related to a localized immune
reaction. Other proposed causes for this disease are
trauma to the affected areas from toothbrush scrapes,
stress, hormones, andfood allergies. Canker sores tend
to appear in response to stress. The initial symptom is
a tingling or mildly painfulitching sensation in the area
where the sore will appear. After one to several days, a
small red swelling appears. The sore is round, and is a
whitish color with a grayish colored center. Usually,
there is a red ring of inflammation surrounding the
sore. The main symptom ispain. Canker sores can be
very painful, especially if they are touched repeatedly,
e.g., by the tongue. They last for one to two weeks.
Diagnosis
Canker sores are diagnosed by observation of the
blister. A distinction between canker sores and cold
sores must be made because cold sores are infectious
and the herpes infection can be transmitted to other
people. The two sores can usually be distinguished
visually and there are specific diagnostic tests for
herpes infection.
Treatment
Since canker sores heal by themselves, treatment is
not usually necessary. Pain relief remedies, such as topi-
cal anesthetics, may be used to reduce the pain of the
sores. The use of corticosteroid ointments sometimes
speeds healing. Avoidance of spicy or acidic foods can
help reduce the pain associated with canker sores.
Alternative treatment
Alternative therapies for canker sores are aimed at
healing existing sores and preventing their recurrence.
Several herbal remedies, including calendula (Calendula
officinalis), myrrh (Commiphora molmol), and golden-
seal (Hydrastis canadensis), may be helpful in the treat-
ment of existing sores. Compresses soaked in teas made
KEY TERMS
Inflammation— A local reaction to tissue injury or
damage, usually characterized by pain, swelling,
and redness.
Sore— A wound, lesion, or ulcer on the skin.
Ulcer— A site of damage to the skin or mucous
membrane that is characterized by the formation
of pus, death of tissue, and is frequently accompa-
nied by an inflammatory reaction.
720 Canker sores
from these herbs are applied directly to the sores. The
tannic acid in a tea bag can also help dry up the sores
when the wet tea bag is used as a compress. Taking
dandelion (Taraxacum officinale) tea or capsules may
help heal sores and also prevent future outbreaks. Since
canker sores are often brought on by stress, such stress-
relieving techniques asmeditation, guided imagery,a n d
certain acupressure exercises may help prevent canker
sores or lessen their severity.
Prognosis
There is no cure for canker sores. They do not get
larger or occur more frequently with age.
Resources
BOOKS
Larsen, D. E., editor.Mayo Clinic Family Health Book.
New York: William Morrow, 1996.
John T. Lohr, PhD
Captopril see Angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors
Carbamazepine see Anticonvulsant drugs
Carbidopa see Antiparkinson drugs
Carbohydrate intolerance
Definition
Carbohydrate intolerance is the inability of the
body to completely process the nutrient carbohydrate
(a classification that includes sugars and starches) into
a source of energy for the body, usually because of the
deficiency of an enzyme needed for digestion.Lactose
intolerance, the inability to digest the sugar found in
milk, is widespread and affects up to 70% of the
world’s adult population.
Description
Carbohydrates are the primary source of energy
and, along with fats and proteins, one of the three
major nutrients in the human diet. Carbohydrates
are classified according to their structure based on
the number of basic sugar, orsaccharide units they
contain.
A monosaccharide is the simplest carbohydrate
and called a simple sugar. Simple sugars include
glucose (the form in which sugar circulates in the
blood), fructose (found in fruit and honey), and galac-
tose (produced by the digestion of milk). These simple
sugars are important because they can be absorbed by
the small intestine. Two simple sugars linked together
make a disaccharide. The disaccharide sugars present
in the diet are maltose (a product of the digestion of
starch), sucrose (table sugar), and lactose (the sugar in
milk). These disaccharides must be broken down by
enzymes into two simple sugars so that they can be
absorbed by the intestine. Polysaccharides are much
more complex carbohydrates made up of many simple
sugars, the most important of which are glycogen,
which is stored in the liver, and starch.
Digestion of sugars
Digestion of food begins in the mouth, moves on
to the stomach, and then into the small intestine.
Along the way, specific enzymes are needed to process
different types of sugars. An enzyme is a substance
that acts as a catalyst to produce chemical changes
without being changed itself. The enzymes lactase,
maltase, and isomaltase (or sucrase) are needed to
break down the disaccharides; when one or more is
inadequate, the result is carbohydrate intolerance.
Types of intolerance
Carbohydrate intolerance can be primary or sec-
ondary. Primary deficiency is caused by an enzyme
defect present at birth or developed over time.
The most common is lactose intolerance. Secondary
deficiencies are caused by a disease or disorder of the
intestinal tract, and disappear when the disease is
treated. These include protein deficiency,celiac dis-
ease, and some intestinal infections.
Adult lactose intolerance is the most common of
all enzyme deficiencies, and it is estimated that 30–50
million Americans have this condition. Some racial
and ethnic populations are affected more than
others. Lactose intolerance is found in as many as
75% of African Americans, Jewish Americans,
Mexican Americans, and Native Americans, and in
90% of Asian Americans. Descendants of Northern
Europeans and some Mediterranean peoples usually
do not develop the condition. Deficiencies in enzymes
other than lactase are extremely rare.
Causes and symptoms
Enzymes play an important role in breaking down
carbohydrates into forms that can pass through the
intestine and be used by the body. Usually they are
Carbohydrate intolerance