DISEASE: Cholera
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

can be inherited and present initially without signs or
symptoms, relatives of a patient with the disease should
be screened periodically for evidences of the disease.
Invasive procedures, which involve the use of
anesthesia, are used to determine the severity of the dis-
ease. In the radionuclide ventriculogram procedure, a
low-dose radioactive material is injected into a vein and
flows to the heart. The heart is photographed with a
special camera to assess thecontraction and filling of
the ventricles at rest and with activity.Cardiac catheter-
ization involves insertion of thin, flexible plastic tubes
(catheters) into the heart from a blood vessel in the
groin area. A dye is then injected that can indicate
blood pressures, blood flow within the heart, and
blockages in the arteries. Although rarely used, a heart
muscle biopsy, where the doctor removes a few, tiny
pieces of the heart for laboratory studies, can aid in
diagnosing possible infections in the heart or metabolic
abnormalities. An electrophysiology study is similar to
heart catheterization. Catheters with fine wires are
inserted through veins in the groin area into the heart.
Electrical stimuli applied through the wires can indicate
abnormal conduction pathways, arrhythmias, effective-
ness of drugs, and the need for an implanted defibrillator.
Treatment
Although there is a long list of possible causes for
cardiomyopathy, few are directly treatable or curable.
Therefore, most therapy is directed towards treating
the effects of the disease on the heart. If cardiomyo-
pathy is diagnosed at an advanced stage, a critically ill
patient will require immediate life-saving measures
such as placement of a breathing tube and administra-
tion of medicines to improve heart function and blood
pressure. Once the patient is stabilized, long-term ther-
apy needs, such as oral medication,pacemakers, sur-
gery, orheart transplantation, will be identified.
Initial treatments for cardiomyopathy for patients
diagnosed in the earlier stages of cardiomyopathy
include drug therapy to relieve heart failure, to decrease
oxygen requirements and workload of the heart (by
relaxing the arteries in the body), and to regulate abnor-
mal heartbeats. Drugs that help the heart contract
include digoxin for at-home use and dopamine, dobu-
tamine, and milrinone for in-hospital use.Diureticshelp
relieve fluid overloads in heart failure.Vasodilators,
ACE-inhibitors, andbeta blockersdilate blood vessels
in the body and lower blood pressure, thus reducing the
workload for the heart. For patients at risk of develop-
ing blood clots, anticoagulation medication or blood
thinners such as heparin or coumadin are prescribed
along with diuretics such as Lasix and aldactone to
relieve venous congestion. These drugs may result in
side effects, so the patient must be carefully monitored
to prevent complications.
When drugs are not effective or when arrhythmias
require regulation, a pacemaker or a defibrillator may
be implanted surgically into the patient. The proce-
dures for implanting both devices involves placing a
small mechanical device under the skin of the chest or
abdomen with wire leads threaded through veins to
the heart. A pacemaker is used to monitor and stabi-
lize slow heartbeats, while a defibrillator (‘‘an emer-
gency room in the heart’’) detects and treats fast and
potentially lethal heart rhythms. Since sudden death
may occur in patients with cardiomyopathy, defibril-
lators are often recommended for persons who show
evidence of arrhythmias.
For heart failure symptoms associated with
restricted blood flow from the ventricles, septalmyo-
mectomy, which is considered major heart surgery, is
sometimes recommended. This procedure involves
surgical removal of the part of the thickened septal
muscle that blocks the blood flow. In some cases, the
mitral valve is replaced with an artificial valve.
However, the procedure does not prevent sudden
death due to hear arrhythmias nor does it stop the
disease from progressing.
Since cardiomyopathy often becomes progressively
worse, the heart can reach a state where it no longer
responds to medication or to surgery. The treatment of
‘‘last resort’’ is a heart transplant, when the patient
exhibits severe heart failure symptoms. A transplant
can cure the symptoms of heart failure, but the surgery
carries significant risks, such as infection, organ rejec-
tion, and side effects of required medications.
There are surgical procedures that can be imple-
mented to sustain life until a transplant donor
becomes available. Left Ventricular Assist Device
(LVAD) provides mechanical circulatory support,
while Dynamic Cardiomyoplasty is a procedure
whereby a skeletal-muscular flap, created from a
patient’s chest muscle, is first taught to contract and
then is wrapped around the heart to aid in contraction.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments are directed towards con-
trol of the effects of heart disease.Exercise,d i e t ,nutri-
tion, herbal therapies, stress reduction,a n do t h e r
life style changes (e.g., cessation ofsmoking)c a na l l
be used to complement conventional treatments.
Certain herbs such as fox glove (Digitalis purpurea)
and lily of the valley (Convallaria majalis)c o n t a i n
736 Cardiomyopathy
cardiac glycosides that make them particularly potent
and may cause dangerous side effects. Their use should
be supervised only be a qualified medical herbalist,
with the concurrence of the primary conventional
health care provider. Even the use of less potent herbs
that improve cardiac function, such as hawthorn
(Crataegus laevigata), should be approved by the con-
ventional health care provider and administered under
the supervision of a medical herbalist.
Prognosis
Long-term prognosis can be unpredictable, as
there can be a wide range of severities and outcomes
associated with the disease. There is no cure, but some
symptoms and complications can be managed and
controlled with medication and implantable devices
or with a heart transplant.
Prevention
Prevention of cardiomyopathy is focused on con-
trolling risk factors for heart disease, which includes
maintaining a healthy weight, exercising regularly,
eating a well-balanced nutritious diet, and avoiding
or minimizing smoking.
Resources
BOOKS
Dilated Cardiomyopathy: A Medical Dictionary,
Bibliography, and Annotated Research Guide to
Internet Resources.San Diego, CA: Icon Health
Publications, 2004.
Maron, Barry J., and Salberg, Lisa.Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy: For Patients, Their Families, and
Interested Physicians.Malden, MA: Futura Media
Services, 2001.
Parker, J.M., and Parker, P.M.The Official Patient’s
Sourcebook on Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.San
Diego, CA: Icon Health Publications, 2002.
Parker, J.M., and Parker, P.M.The Official Patient’s
Sourcebook on Dilated Cardiomyopathy.San Diego,
CA: Icon Health Publications, 2002.
PERIODICALS
Ommen, Steve R., and Nishimura, Rick A. ‘‘A Physician’s
Guide to the Treatment of Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy.’’ HeartViews1(10): 393 - 401.
<http://www.mayoclinic.org/hypertrophic-
cardiomyopathy/physiciansguide.html>.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association, National Center, 7272
Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231. Telephone: (800)
242-8721; <http://www.americanheart.org/>.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Association, P.O. Box 306
Hibernia NJ 07842. Telephone: (973) 983-7429;
<http://www.4hcm.org/>.
Children’s Cardiomyopathy Foundation, P.O. Box 547,
Tenafly, New Jersey 07670. Telephone: (201) 227-8852;
<http://www.childrenscardiomyopathy.org/>.
OTHER
Cleveland Clinic Heart Center. <http://www.cleveland-
clinic.org/heartcenter/pub/guide/disease/hcm.asp>.
National Heart, Blood, and Lung Institute, National
Institutes of Health, NHLBI Health Information Center,
P.O. Box 30105, Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. Telephone:
(301) 592 8573; <http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov> .
Heart Center Online. <http:// www.heartcenteronline.com>.
Judith Sims
KEY TERMS
Arrhythmia— An abnormal rhythm or irregularity
of the heartbeat. The heartbeat may either be too
fast (tachycardia) or too slow (bradicardia).
Arrhythmias may cause symptoms such as palpita-
tion or light-headedness, but many have more ser-
ious consequences, including sudden death.
Congestive heart failure— Potentially lethal condi-
tion in which congestion develops in the lungs that
is produced by a heart attack, poorly controlled or
uncontrolled hypertension, or disease processes
that weaken the heart
Hypertrophy— Literally means an increase in the
muscle mass (or weight) of the heart.
Mitral valve leaflets— The mitral valve is made up
of two valve leaflets (the anteromedial leaflet and
the posterolateral leaflet) and a ring around the
valve, known as the mitral valve annulus. The
orientation of the two leaflets resembles a bishop’s
miter, which is where the valve receives its name.
Myocardium— The muscular wall of the heart
located between the inner endocardial layer and
the outer epicardial layer.
Noninvasive — Refers to tests that generally do not
invade the integrity of the body, such as echocar-
diography or electrocardiography. (Cardiac cathe-
therization, on the other hand, in which catheters
are introduced through blood vessels into the heart,
is an example of an invasive test).
Septum (ventricular septum)— That portion of the
heart wall that divides the right and left ventricles.
Ventricles — The two main (lower) pumping cham-
bers of the heart; the right and left ventricles pump
blood to the lungs and aorta, respectively.
Cardiomyopathy
Cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR)
Definition
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is a proce-
dure to support and maintain breathing and circula-
tion for a person who has stopped breathing
(respiratory arrest) and/or whose heart has stopped
(cardiac arrest).
Purpose
CPR is performed to restore and maintain breath-
ing and circulation and to provide oxygen and blood
flow to the heart, brain, and other vital organs. CPR
should be performed if a person is unconscious and
not breathing. Respiratory and cardiac arrest can be
caused by allergic reactions, an ineffective heartbeat,
asphyxiation, breathing passages that are blocked,
choking, drowning, drug reactions or overdoses, elec-
tric shock, exposure to cold, severe shock, or trauma.
CPR can be performed by trained bystanders or
healthcare professionals on infants, children, and
adults. It should always be performed by the person
on the scene who is most experienced in CPR.
Precautions
CPR should never be performed on a healthy
person because it can cause serious injury to a beating
heart by interfering with normal heartbeats.
Description
CPR is part of the emergency cardiac care system
designed to save lives. Many deaths can be prevented
by prompt recognition of the problem and notification
of the emergency medical system (EMS), followed by
early CPR,defibrillation (which delivers a brief electric
shock to the heart in attempt to get the heart to
beat normally), and advanced cardiac life support
measures.
CPR must be performed within four to six min-
utes after cessation of breathing so as to prevent brain
damage or death. It is a two-part procedure that
involves rescue breathing and external chest compres-
sions. To provide oxygen to a person’s lungs, the
rescuer administers mouth-to-mouth breaths, then
helps circulate blood through the heart to vital organs
by external chest compressions. Mouth-to-mouth
breathing and external chest compression should be
performed together, but if the rescuer is not strong
enough to do both, the external chest compressions
should be done. This is more effective than no resusci-
tation attempt, as is CPR that is performed ‘‘poorly.’’
When performed by a bystander, CPR is designed
to support and maintain breathing and circulation
until emergency medical personnel arrive and take
over. When performed by healthcare personnel, it is
used in conjunction with other basic and advanced life
support measures.
According to the American Heart Association,
early CPR and defibrillation combined with early
advanced emergency care can increase survival rates
for people with a type of abnormal heart beat called
ventricular fibrillation by as much as 40%. CPR by
bystanders may prolong life during deadly ventricular
fibrillation, giving emergency medical service person-
nel time to arrive.
However, many CPR attempts are not ultimately
successful in restoring a person to a good quality of
life. Often, there is brain damage even if the heart
starts beating again. CPR is therefore not generally
recommended for the chronically or terminally ill or
frail elderly. For these people, it represents a traumatic
and not a peaceful end of life.
Each year, CPR helps save thousands of lives in
the United States. More than five million Americans
annually receive training in CPR through American
Heart Association and American Red Cross courses.
In addition to courses taught by instructors, the
American Heart Association also has an interactive
video called Learning System, which is available at
more than 500 healthcare institutions. Both organiza-
tions teach CPR the same way, but use different terms.
These organizations recommend that family members
or other people who live with people who are at risk
for respiratory or cardiac arrest be trained in CPR. A
hand-held device called a CPR Prompt is available to
walk people trained in CPR through the procedure,
using American Heart Association guidelines. CPR
has been practiced for more than 40 years.
Performing CPR
The basic procedure for CPR is the same for all
people, with a few modifications for infants and children
to account for their smaller size.
PERFORMING CPR ON AN ADULT. The first step is
to call the emergency medical system for help by tele-
phoning 911; then to begin CPR, following these steps:
/C15The rescuer opens a person’s airway by placing the
head face up, with the forehead tilted back and the
chin lifted. The rescuer checks again for breathing
(three to five seconds), then begins rescue breathing
738 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
(mouth-to-mouth artificial respiration), pinching the
nostrils shut while holding the chin in the other hand.
The rescuer’s mouth is placed against the uncon-
scious person’s mouth with the lips making a tight
seal, then gently exhales for about one to one and a
half seconds. The rescuer breaks away for a moment
and then repeats. The person’s head is repositioned
after each mouth-to-mouth breath.
/C15After two breaths, the rescuer checks the uncon-
scious person’s pulse by moving the hand that was
under the person’s chin to the artery in the neck
(carotid artery). If the unconscious person has a
heartbeat, the rescuer continues rescue breathing
until help arrives or the person begins breathing
without assistance. If the unconscious person is
breathing, the rescuer turns the person onto his or
her side.
/C15If there is no heartbeat, the rescuer performs chest
compressions. The rescuer kneels next to the uncon-
scious person, placing the heel of one hand in the
spot on the lower chest where the two halves of the
rib cage come together. The rescuer puts one hand on
top of the other on the person’s chest and interlocks
the fingers. The arms are straightened, the rescuer’s
shoulders are positioned directly above the hands on
the unconscious person’s chest. The hands are
pressed down, using only the palms, so that the
person’s breastbone sinks in about 1½–2 inches.
The rescuer releases pressure without removing the
hands, then repeats about 15 times per 10–15 second
intervals.
/C15The rescuer tilts the unconscious person’s head and
returns to rescue breathing for one or two quick
breaths. Then breathing and chest compressions are
alternated for one minute before checking for a
pulse. If the rescuer finds signs of a heartbeat and
breathing, CPR is stopped. If the unconscious person
is breathing but has no pulse, the chest compressions
are continued. If the unconscious person has a pulse
but is not breathing, rescue breathing is continued.
/C15For children over the age of eight, the rescuer per-
forms CPR exactly as for an adult.
PERFORMING CPR ON AN INFANT OR CHILD UNDER
THE AGE OF EIGHT. The procedures outlined above are
followed with these differences:
/C15The rescuer administers CPR for one minute, then
calls for help.
/C15The rescuer makes a seal around the child’s mouth or
infant’s nose and mouth to give gentle breaths. The
rescuer delivers 20 rescue breaths per minute, taking
1½–2 seconds for each breath.
/C15Chest compressions are given with only one hand for
a child and with two or three fingers for an infant.
The breastbone is depressed only 1–1½ inch for a
child and ½–1 inch for an infant, the rescuer gives at
least 100 chest compressions per minute.
New developments in CPR
Some new ways of performing CPR have been
tried. Active compression-decompression resuscita-
tion, abdominal compression done in between chest
compressions, and chest compression using a pneu-
matic vest have all been tested but none are currently
recommended for routine use.
The active compression-decompression device
was developed to improve blood flow from the heart,
but clinical studies have found no significant differ-
ence in survival between standard and active compres-
sion-decompression CPR. Interposed abdominal
counterpulsation, which requires two or more res-
cuers, one compressing the chest and the other com-
pressing the abdomen, was developed to improve
pressure and therefore blood flow. It has been shown
in a small study to improve survival but more data is
needed. A pneumatic vest, which circles the chest of an
unconscious person and compresses it, increases pres-
sure within the chest during external chest compres-
sion. The vest has been shown to improve survival in a
preliminary study but more data is necessary for a full
assessment.
Preparation
If a person suddenly becomes unconscious, a res-
cuer should call out for help from other bystanders,
and then determine if the unconscious person is
responsive by gently shaking the shoulder and shout-
ing a question. Upon receiving no answer, the rescuer
should call the emergency medical system. The rescuer
should check to see whether the unconscious person is
breathing by kneeling near the person’s shoulders,
looking at the person’s chest, and placing a cheek
next to the unconscious person’s mouth. The rescuer
should look for signs of breathing in the chest and
abdomen, and listen and feel for signs of breathing
through the person’s lips. If no signs of breathing are
present after three to five seconds, CPR should be
started.
Aftercare
Emergency medical care is always necessary
after successful CPR. Once a person’s breathing
and heartbeat have been restored, the rescuer should
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
Figure B
Figure C
Figure D
Figure E
Figure A
Figure F
CPR in basic life support. Figure A: The victim should be flat on his back and his mouth should be checked for debris. Figure B: If
the victim is unconscious, open airway, lift neck, and tilt head back. Figure C: If victim is not breathing, begin artificial breathing
with four quick full breaths. Figure D: Check for carotid pulse. Figure E: If pulse is absent, begin artificial circulation by
depressing sternum. Figure F: Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation of an infant.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
740 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
make the person comfortable and stay there until
emergency medical personnel arrive. The rescuer
can continue to reassure the person that help is
coming and talk positively until professionals arrive
and take over.
Risks
CPR can cause injury to a person’s ribs, liver,
lungs, and heart. However, these risks must be
accepted if CPR is necessary to save the person’s life.
Normal results
In many cases, successful CPR results in restora-
tion of consciousness and life. Barring other injuries, a
revived person usually returns to normal functions
within a few hours of being revived.
Abnormal results
These include injuries incurred during CPR and
lack of success with CPR. Possible sites for injuries
include a person’s ribs, liver, lungs, and heart.
Partially successful CPR may result in brain damage.
Unsuccessful CPR results in death.
Resources
BOOKS
Alton, Thygerson.First Aid and CPR.4th ed. Sudbury,
Massachusetts: Jones & Bartlett Pub, 2001.
Knoop, Kevin J., and Lawrence B. Stack.Atlas of
Emergency Medicine.2nd ed. New York: McGraw Hill,
2001.
National Safety Council.First Aid and CPR for Infants and
Children. 4th ed. Sudbury, Massachusetts: Jones &
Bartlett Pub, 2001.
PERIODICALS
Davies, N., and D. Gould. ‘‘Updating cardiopulmonary
resuscitation skills: a study to examine the efficacy of
self-instruction on nurses’ competence.’’Journal of
Clinical Nursing9 (2000): 400-410.
E f t e s t o lT . ,K .S u n d e ,S .O .A a s e ,J .H .H u s o y ,a n d
P. A. Steen. ‘‘‘Probability of successful defibrillation’
as a monitor during CPR in out-of-hospital
cardiac arrested patients.’’Resuscitation 48 (2001):
245-254.
Kern, K. B., H. R. Halperin, and J. Field. ‘‘New
guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
emergency cardiac care: changes in the management
of cardiac arrest.’’Journal of the American Medical
Association 285 (2001): 1267-1269.
Meyer W., and F. Balck. ‘‘Resuscitation decision index: a
new approach to decision-making in prehospital CPR.’’
Resuscitation 48 (2001): 255-263.
ORGANIZATIONS
American College of Emergency Physicians. P.O. Box
619911, Dallas, TX 75261-9911. (800) 798-1822 or
(972) 550-0911. Fax: (972) 580-2816. <http://www.
acep.org/>. info@acep.org.
American College of Osteopathic Emergency Physicians.
142 E. Ontario Street, Suite 550, Chicago, IL 60611.
(312) 587-3709 or (800) 521-3709. Fax: (312) 587-9951.
<http://www.acoep.org>.
American Heart Association, National Center. 7272
Greenville Avenue, Dallas, TX 75231. (877) 242-4277.
<http://www.americanheart.org/
Heart_and_Stroke_A_Z_Guide/heim.html>.
Heimlich Institute. PO Box 8858, Cincinnati, OH 45208.
<http://www.heimlichinstitute.org/index.htm>.
heimlich@iglou.com.
National Safe Kids Campaign. 1301 Pennsylvania Avenue,
Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20004-1707. <http://
pedsccm.wustl.edu/All-Net/english/neurpage/protect/
drown.htm>.
OTHER
American Heart Association. <http://www.cpr-ecc.org/>
and <http://www.americanheart.org/
Heart_and_Stroke_A_Z_Guide/cprs.html>.
Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center. <http://cpmcnet.
columbia.edu/texts/guide/hmg13_0001.html>.
Learn CPR. <http://www.learn-cpr.com>.
National Registry of Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation.
<http://www.nrcpr.org/>.
University of Washington School of Medicine. <http://
depts.washington.edu/learncpr/>.
L. Fleming Fallon, Jr., MD, DrPH
KEY TERMS
Cardiac arrest— Temporary or permanent cessa-
tion of the heartbeat.
Cardiopulmonary— Relating to the heart and the
lungs.
Defibrillation— A procedure to stop the type of
irregular heart beat called ventricular fibrillation,
usually by using electric shock.
Resuscitation— Bringing a person back to life after
an apparent death or in cases of impending death.
Ventricular fibrillation— An irregular heartbeat
where the heart beats very fast but ineffectively.
Ventricular fibrillation is fatal if not quickly
corrected.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
Cardioversion
Definition
Cardioversion refers to the process of restoring
the heart’s normal rhythm by applying a controlled
electric shock to the exterior of the chest.
Purpose
When the heart beats too fast, blood no longer
circulates effectively in the body. Cardioversion
is used to stop this abnormal beating so that the
heart can begin normal rhythm and pump more
efficiently.
Precautions
Not all unusual heart rhythms (calledarrhyth-
mias) are dangerous or fatal. Atrial fibrillation and
atrial flutter often revert to normal rhythms without
the need for cardioversion. Healthcare providers may
also try to correct the heart rhythm with medication or
recommend a lifestyle change before trying cardiover-
sion. However, ventricular tachycardia lasting more
than 30 seconds and ventricular fibrillation require
immediate cardioversion.
Description
Elective cardioversion is usually scheduled ahead
of time. After arriving at the hospital, an intravenous
(IV) catheter will be placed in the arm and oxygen will
be given through a face mask. A short-acting general
anesthetic will be administered through the vein.
During the two or three minutes of anesthesia, the
doctor will apply two paddles to the exterior of the
chest and administer the electric shock. It may be
necessary to give the shock two or three times to
obtain normal rhythm.
Preparation
Medication to thin the blood is usually given for
at least three weeks before elective cardioversion.
Food intake should be stopped eight hours before
the procedure.
Aftercare
Medical personnel will monitor the heart rhythm
for a few hours, after which the patient is usually sent
home. It is advisable to arrange for transportation
home, because drowsiness may last several hours.
The doctor may prescribe anti-arrhythmic medication
to prevent the abnormal rhythm from returning.
Risks
Cardioverters have been in use for many years
and the risks are few. Those unlikely risks that
remain include those instances when the device deli-
vers greater or lesser power than expected or when
power setting and control knobs are not set correctly.
Unfortunately, in a number of cases, the heart prefers
its abnormal rhythm and reverts to it despite
cardioversion.
Normal results
Most cardioversions are successful and, at least
for a time, restore the normal heart rhythm.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://
www.americanheart.org>.
Dorothy Elinor Stonely
Carisoprodol see Muscle relaxants
Carotid artery surgery see Endarterectomy
Carotid Doppler ultrasound see Doppler
ultrasonography
Carotid endarterectomy see Endarterectomy
KEY TERMS
Atrial fibrillation— A condition in which the upper
chamber of the heart quivers instead of pumping in
an organized way.
Atrial flutter— A rapid pulsation of the upper
chamber of the heart that interferes with normal
function.
Ventricular fibrillation— A condition in which the
lower chamber of the heart quivers instead of
pumping in an organized way.
Ventricular tachycardia— A rapid heart beat,
usually over 100 beats per minute.
742 Cardioversion
Carotid sinus massage
Definition
Carotid sinus massage involves rubbing the large
part of the arterial wall at the point where the common
carotid artery, located in the neck, divides into its two
main branches.
Purpose
Sinus, in this case, means an area in a blood vessel
that is bigger than the rest of the vessel. This is a
normal dilation of the vessel. Located in the neck
just below the angle of the jaw, the carotid sinus sits
above the point where the carotid artery divides into
its two main branches. Rubbing the carotid sinus sti-
mulates an area in the artery wall that contains nerve
endings. These nerves respond to changes in blood
pressure and are capable of slowing the heart rate.
The response to this simple procedure often slows a
rapid heart rate (for example, atrial flutter or atrial
tachycardia) and can provide important diagnostic
information to the physician.
Description
The patient will be asked to lie down, with the
neck fully extended and the head turned away from the
side being massaged. While watching an electrocardio-
gram monitor, the doctor will gently touch the carotid
sinus. If there is no change in the heart rate on the
monitor, the pressure is applied more firmly with a
gentle rotating motion. After massaging one side of
the neck, the massage will be repeated on the other
side. Both sides of the neck are never massaged at the
same time.
Preparation
No special preparation is needed for carotid sinus
massage.
Aftercare
No aftercare is required.
Risks
The physician must be sure there is no evidence of
blockage in the carotid artery before performing the
procedure. Massage in a blocked area might cause a
clot to break loose and cause astroke.
Normal results
Carotid sinus massage will slow the heart rate
during episodes of atrial flutter, fibrillation, and
some tachycardias. It has been known to stop the
arrhythmia completely. If the procedure is being
done to help diagnoseangina pectoris, massaging the
carotid sinus may make the discomfort go away.
Resources
BOOKS
McGood, Michael D., editor.Mayo Clinic Heart Book: The
Ultimate Guide to Heart Health.New York: William
Morrow and Co., Inc., 1993.
Dorothy Elinor Stonely
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Definition
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a disorder caused by
compression at the wrist of the median nerve supply-
ing the hand, causingnumbness and tingling.
Description
The carpal tunnel is an area in the wrist where the
bones and ligaments create a small passageway for
the median nerve. The median nerve is responsible
KEY TERMS
Angina pectoris— Chest pain usually caused by a
lack of oxygen in the heart muscle.
Arrhythmia— Any deviation from a normal heart
beat.
Atrial fibrillation— A condition in which the upper
chamber of the heart quivers instead of pumping in
an organized way.
Atrial flutter— Rapid, inefficient contraction of the
upper chamber of the heart.
Carotid artery— One of the major arteries supply-
ing blood to the head and neck.
Tachycardia— A rapid heart beat, usually over 100
beats per minute.
Carpal tunnel syndrome
for both sensation and movement in the hand, in
particular the thumb and first three fingers. When
the median nerve is compressed, an individual’s hand
will feel as if it has ‘‘gone to sleep.’’
Women between the ages of 30 and 60 have the
highest rates of carpal tunnel syndrome. Research has
demonstrated that carpal tunnel syndrome is a very
significant cause of missed work days due topain.I n
1995, about $270 million was spent on sick days taken
for pain from repetitive motion injuries.
Causes and symptoms
Compression of the median nerve in the wrist can
occur during a number of different conditions, parti-
cularly those conditions which lead to changes in
fluid accumulation throughout the body. Because
the area of the wrist through which the median
nerve passes is very narrow, any swelling in the area
will lead to pressure on the median nerve. This pres-
sure will ultimately interfere with the nerve’s ability
to function normally. Pregnancy, obesity,a r t h r i t i s ,
certain thyroid conditions , diabetes, and certain
pituitary abnormalities all predispose to carpal tun-
nel syndrome. Other conditions which increase
the risk for carpal tunnel syndrome include some
forms of arthritis and various injuries to the arm
and wrist (including fractures, sprains,a n ddisloca-
tions). Furthermore, activities which cause an indivi-
dual to repeatedly bend the wrist inward toward the
forearm can predispose to carpal tunnel syndrome.
Certain jobs which require repeated strong wrist
motions carry a relatively high risk of carpal tunnel
syndrome. Injuries of this type are referred to as
‘‘repetitive motion’’ injuries, and are more frequent
among secretaries doing a lot of typing, people work-
ing at computer keyboards or cash registers, factory
workers, and some musicians.
Symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome include
numbness, burning, tingling, and a prickly pin-like
sensation over the palm surface of the hand, and
into the thumb, forefinger, middle finger, and half
of the ring finger. Some individuals notice a shooting
pain which goes from the wrist up the arm, or down
into the hand and fingers. With continued median
nerve compression, an individual may begin to
experience muscle weakness, making it difficult to
open jars and hold objectswith the affected hand.
Eventually, the muscles of the hand served by the
median nerve may begin to grow noticeably smaller
(atrophy), especially the fleshy part of the thumb.
Untreated, carpal tunnel syndrome may eventually
result in permanent weakness, loss of sensation, or
even paralysis of the thumb and fingers of the affected
hand.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome is made
in part by checking to see whether the patient’s
symptoms can be brought on by holding his or her
hand in position with wrist bent for about a minute.
Wrist x rays are often taken to rule out the possibi-
lity of a tumor causing pressure on the median nerve.
A physician examining a patient suspected of having
carpal tunnel syndrome will perform a variety of
simple tests to measure muscle strength and sensa-
tion in the affected hand and arm. Further testing
might include electromyographic or nerve conduc-
tion velocity testing to determine the exact severity
of nerve damage. These tests involve stimulating the
median nerve with electricity and measuring the
resulting speed and strength of the muscle response,
as well as recording speed of nerve transmission
across the carpal tunnel.
Carpal tunnel ligament
Median nerve
Carpal tunnel ligament (severed)
Median nerve
The most severe cases of carpal tunnel syndrome may
require surgery to decrease the compression of the median
nerve and restore its normal function. This procedure
involves severing the ligament that crosses the wrist, thus
allowing the median nerve more room and decreasing com-
pression. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
744 Carpal tunnel syndrome
Treatment
Carpal tunnel syndrome is initially treated with
splints, which support the wrist and prevent it from
flexing inward into the position which exacerbates med-
ian nerve compression. Some people get significant
relief by wearing such splints to sleep at night, while
others will need to wear the splints all day, especially if
they are performing jobs which stress the wrist.
Ibuprofen or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs may be prescribed to decrease pain and swelling.
When carpal tunnel syndrome is more advanced, injec-
tion of steroids into the wrist to decrease inflammation
may be necessary.
The most severe cases of carpal tunnel syndrome
may require surgery to decrease the compression of the
median nerve and restore its normal function. Such a
repair involves cutting that ligament which crosses the
wrist, thus allowing the median nerve more room and
decreasing compression. This surgery is done almost
exclusively on an outpatient basis and is often per-
formed without the patient having to be made uncon-
scious. Careful injection of numbing medicines (local
anesthesia) or nerve blocks (the injection of anesthetics
directly into the nerve) create sufficient numbness to
allow the surgery to be performed painlessly, without
the risks associated withgeneral anesthesia. Recovery
from this type of surgery is usually quick and without
complications.
Prognosis
Without treatment, continued pressure on the
median nerve puts an individual at risk for permanent
disability in the affected hand. Most people are able to
control the symptoms of carpal tunnel syndrome with
splinting and anti-inflammatory agents. For those
who go on to require surgery, about 95% will have
complete cessation of symptoms.
Prevention
Prevention is generally aimed at becoming aware
of the repetitive motions which one must make which
could put the wrist into a bent position. People who
must work long hours at a computer keyboard, for
example, may need to take advantage of recent
advances in ‘‘ergonomics,’’ which try to position the
keyboard and computer components in a way that
increases efficiency and decreases stress. Early use of
a splint may also be helpful for people whose jobs
increase the risk of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Seiler, John Gray. ‘‘Carpal Tunnel Syndrome: Update on
Diagnostic Testing and Treatment Options.’’
Consultant 37, no. 5 (May 1997): 1233.
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
Casts see Immobilization
Cat-bite infection see Animal bite infections
Cat-scratch disease
Definition
Cat-scratch disease is an uncommon infection
that typically results from a cat’s scratch or bite.
Most sufferers experience only moderate discomfort
and find that their symptoms clear up without
any lasting harm after a few weeks or months.
Professional medical treatment is rarely needed.
Description
Cat-scratch disease (also called cat-scratchfever)
is caused by theBartonella henselae bacterium, which
is found in cats around the world and is transmitted
from cat to cat by fleas. Researchers have discovered
that large numbers of North American cats carry
antibodies for the disease (meaning that the cats
have been infected at some point in their lives).
Some parts of North America have much higher
KEY TERMS
Carpal tunnel— A passageway in the wrist, created
by the bones and ligaments of the wrist, through
which the median nerve passes.
Electromyography— A type of test in which a
nerve’s function is tested by stimulating a nerve
with electricity, and then measuring the speed
and strength of the corresponding muscle’s
response.
Median nerve— A nerve which runs through the
wrist and into the hand. It provides sensation
and some movement to the hand, the thumb, the
index finger, the middle finger, and half of the ring
finger.
Cat-scratch disease
rates of cat infection than others, however.Bartonella
henselae is uncommon or absent in cold climates,
which fleas have difficulty tolerating, but prevalent
in warm, humid places such as Memphis, Tennessee,
where antibodies were found in 71% of the cats
tested. The bacterium, which remains in a cat’s
bloodstream for several months after infection,
seems to be harmless to most cats, and normally an
infected cat will not display any symptoms. Kittens
(cats less than one year old) are more likely than adult
cats to be carrying the infection.
Bartonella henselae can infect people who are
scratched or (more rarely) bitten or licked by a cat. It
cannot be passed from person to person. Although
cats are popular pets found in about 30% of
American households, human infection appears to be
rare. One study estimated that for every 100,000
Americans there are only 2.5 cases of cat-scratch dis-
ease each year (2.5/100,000). It is also unusual for
more than one family member to become ill; a
Florida investigation discovered multiple cases in
only 3.5% of the families studied. Children and teen-
agers appear to be the most likely victims of cat-
scratch disease, although the possibility exists that
the disease may be more common among adults than
previously thought.
Causes and symptoms
The first sign of cat-scratch disease may be a small
blister at the site of a scratch or bite three to 10 days
after injury. The blister (which sometimes contains
pus) often looks like an insect bite and is usually
found on the hands, arms, or head. Within two
weeks of the blister’s appearance, lymph nodes near
the site of injury become swollen. Often the infected
person develops a fever or experiencesfatigue or head-
aches. The symptoms usually disappear within a
month, although the lymph nodes may remain swollen
for several months. Hepatitis,pneumonia, and other
dangerous complications can arise, but the likelihood
of cat-scratch disease posing a serious threat to health
is very small.AIDS patients and other immunocom-
promised people face the greatest risk of dangerous
complications.
Occasionally, the symptoms of cat-scratch disease
take the form of what is called Parinaud’s oculogland-
ular syndrome. In such cases, a small sore develops
on the palpebral conjunctiva (the membrane lining
the inner eyelid), and is often accompanied bycon-
junctivitis (inflammation of the membrane) and swol-
len lymph nodes in front of the ear. Researchers
suspect that the first step in the development of
Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome occurs when
Bartonella henselae bacteria pass from a cat’s saliva
to its fur during grooming. Rubbing one’s eyes after
handling the cat then transmits the bacteria to the
conjunctiva.
Diagnosis
A family doctor should be called whenever a cat
scratch or bite fails to heal normally or is followed by a
persistent fever or other unusual symptoms such as
long-lasting bone or joint pain. The appearance of
painful and swollen lymph nodes is another reason
for consulting a doctor. When cat-scratch disease is
suspected, the doctor will ask about a history of expo-
sure to cats and look for evidence of a cat scratch or
bite and swollen lymph nodes. A blood test for
Bartonella henselae may be ordered to confirm the
doctor’s diagnosis.
Treatment
For otherwise healthy people, rest and over-the-
counter medications for reducing fever and discomfort
(such asacetaminophen) while waiting for the disease
to run its course are usually all that is necessary.
Antibiotics are prescribed in some cases, particularly
when complications occur or the lymph nodes remain
swollen and painful for more than two or three
months, but there is no agreement among doctors
about when and how they should be used. If a lymph
node becomes very swollen and painful, the family
doctor may decide to drain it.
Prognosis
Most people recover completely from a bout of
cat-scratch disease. Further attacks are rare.
Prevention
Certain common–sense precautions can be taken
to guard against the disease. Scratches and bites
should be washed immediately with soap and water,
and it is never a good idea to rub one’s eyes after
handling a cat without first washing one’s hands.
Children should be told not to play with stray cats or
make cats angry. Immunocompromised people should
avoid owning kittens, which are more likely than adult
cats to be infectious. Because cat-scratch disease is
usually not a life-threatening illness and people tend
to form strong emotional bonds with their cats, doc-
tors do not recommend getting rid of a cat suspected of
carrying the disease.
746 Cat-scratch disease
Resources
PERIODICALS
Smith, David L. ‘‘Cat-Scratch Disease and Related Clinical
Syndromes.’’ American Family PhysicianApril 1997:
1783.
Howard Baker
Cat-scratch fever see Cat-scratch disease
CAT scan see Computed tomography scans
Cataract surgery
Definition
Cataract surgery is a procedure performed to
remove a cloudy lens from the eye; usually an intra-
ocular lens is implanted at the same time.
Purpose
The purpose of cataract surgery is to restore clear
vision. It is indicated when cloudy vision due tocatar-
acts has progressed to such an extent that it interferes
with normal daily activities. It is one of the most
commonly performed surgical procedures in the
world.
Precautions
Cataract surgery is not performed on both eyes at
once. To avoid risking blindness in both eyes in the
event of infection or other catastrophe, the first eye is
allowed to heal before the cataract is removed from
the second eye.
The presence of cataracts can mask additional eye
problems, such as retinal damage, that neither doctors
nor patients are aware of prior to surgery. Since such
conditions will continue to impair sight after cataract
removal if they are not identified and treated, the
eventual outcome of cataract surgery will depend on
the outcome of other problems.
In 1997 and 1998, evidence that cataract surgery
can contribute to the progression of age-relatedmacu-
lar degeneration (ARMD) was published. ARMD is
the degeneration of the central part of the retina.
Accordingly, ARMD patients with cataracts must
weigh the risks of the loss of central vision, within
four or five years, against short-term improvement.
When an ARMD patient chooses cataract surgery,
the surgeon should shield the retina against bright
light to protect it from possible light-induced damage
during surgery and install an intraocular lens capable
of absorbing ultraviolet and blue light, which seem to
do the most damage.
Description
There are two types of cataract surgery: intracap-
sular and extracapsular. Intracapsular surgery is the
removal of both the lens and the thin capsule that
surround the lens. This type of surgery was common
before 1980, but has since been displaced by extracap-
sular surgery. Removal of the capsule requires a large
incision and doesn’t allow comfortable intraocular
lens implantation. Thus, people who undergo intra-
capsular cataract surgery have long recovery periods
and have to wear very thick glasses.
Extracapsular cataract surgery is the removal of
the lens where the capsule is left in place. Each year in
the United States, over a million cataracts are removed
this way. Physicians and researchers continue to
improve cataract surgery methods. Research from
France in 2003 said that cataract removal and non-
penetrating glaucoma surgery can be combined in
glaucoma patients.
There are two methods for extracapsular cataract
surgery. The usual technique is phacoemulsification.
KEY TERMS
Acetaminophen— A drug for relieving pain and fever.
AIDS— Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
A disease that attacks the immune system.
Antibiotics— A category of manufactured sub-
stances used to combat infection.
Antibodies— Special substances created by the
body to combat infection.
Bacterium— A tiny organism. Some bacteria cause
disease.
Hepatitis— A disease that inflames the liver.
Immune system— A body system that combats
disease.
Immunocompromised— Having a damaged imm-
une system.
Lymph nodes— Small, kidney-shaped organs that
filter a fluid called lymph.
Pneumonia— A disease that inflames the lungs.
Pus— A thick yellowish or greenish fluid.
Cataract surgery