DISEASE: Common Cold
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Postural drainage
Postural drainage uses the force of gravity to
assist in effectively draining secretions from the lungs
and into the central airway where they can either be
coughed up or suctioned out. The patient is placed in a
head or chest down position and is kept in this position
for up to 15 minutes. Critical care patients and those
depending on mechanical ventilation receive postural
drainage therapy four to six times daily. Percussion
and vibration may be performed in conjunction with
postural drainage.
Percussion
Percussion is rhythmically striking the chest wall
with cupped hands. It is also called cupping, clapping,
or tapotement. The purpose of percussion is to break
up thick secretions in the lungs so that they can be
more easily removed. Percussion is performed on each
lung segment for one to two minutes at a time.
Vibration
As with percussion, the purpose of vibration is to
help break up lung secretions. Vibration can be either
mechanical or manual. It is performed as the patient
breathes deeply. When done manually, the person per-
forming the vibration places his or her hands against the
patient’s chest and creates vibrations by quickly con-
tracting and relaxing arm and shoulder muscles while
the patient exhales. The procedure is repeated several
times each day for about five exhalations.
Preparation
The only preparation needed for chest physical
therapy is an evaluation of the patient’s condition
and determination of which chest physical therapy
techniques would be most beneficial.
Aftercare
Patients practiceoral hygieneprocedures to lessen
the bad taste or odor of the secretions they spit out.
Risks
Risks and complications associated with chest
physical therapy depend on the health of the patient.
Although chest physical therapy usually poses few
problems, in some patients it may cause
/C15oxygen deficiency if the head is kept lowered for
drainage
/C15increased intracranial pressure
KEY TERMS
Coughing— Coughing helps break up secretions in
the lungs so that the mucus can be suctioned out or
expectorated. Patients sit upright and inhale deeply
through the nose. They then exhale in short puffs or
coughs. Coughing is repeated several times per day.
Deep breathing— Deep breathing helps expand the
lungs and forces better distribution of the air into all
sections of the lung. The patient either sits in a chair
or sits upright in bed and inhales, pushing the abdo-
men out to force maximum amounts of air into the
lung. The abdomen is then contracted, and the
patient exhales. Deep breathing exercises are
done several times each day for short periods.
Percussion— This consists of rhythmically striking
the chest wall with cupped hands. It is also called
cupping, clapping, or tapotement. The purpose of
percussion is to break up thick secretions in the
lungs so that they can be more easily removed.
Percussion is performed on each lung segment for
one to two minutes at a time.
Postural drainage— This technique uses the force of
gravity to assist in effectively draining secretions
from the lungs and into the central airway where
they can either be coughed up or suctioned out. The
patient is placed in a head or chest down position
and is kept in this position for up to 15 minutes.
Critical care patients and those depending on
mechanical ventilation receive postural drainage
therapy four to six times daily. Percussion and vibra-
tion may be performed in conjunction with postural
drainage.
Turning— Turning from side to side permits lung
expansion. Patients may turn themselves or be
turned by a caregiver. The head of the bed is also
elevated to promote drainage if the patient can tol-
erate this position. Critically ill patients and those
dependent on mechanical respiration are turned
once every one to two hours around the clock.
Vibration— The purpose of vibration is to help
break up lung secretions. Vibration can be either
mechanical or manual. It is performed as the patient
breathes deeply. When done manually, the person
performing the vibration places his or her hands
against the patient’s chest and creates vibrations
by quickly contracting and relaxing arm and
shoulder muscles while the patient exhales. The
procedure is repeated several times each day for
about five exhalations.
826 Chest physical therapy
/C15temporary low blood pressure
/C15bleeding in the lungs
/C15pain or injury to the ribs, muscles, or spine
/C15vomiting
/C15inhaling secretions into the lungs
/C15heart irregularities
Normal results
The patient is considered to be responding posi-
tively to chest physical therapy if some, but not neces-
sarily all, of these changes occur:
/C15increased volume of sputum secretions
/C15changes in breath sounds
/C15improved vital signs
/C15improved chest x ray
/C15increased oxygen in the blood as measured by arterial
blood gas values
/C15patient reports of eased breathing
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. 6931 Arlington Road,
Bethesda, MD 20814. (800) 344-4823. <http://
www.cff.org>.
Tish Davidson, A.M.
Chest radiography see Chest x ray
Chest x ray
Definition
A chest x ray is a procedure used to evaluate
organs and structures within the chest for symptoms
of disease. Chest x rays include views of the lungs,
heart, small portions of the gastrointestinal tract, thy-
roid gland and the bones of the chest area. X rays are a
form of radiation that can penetrate the body and
produce an image on an x–ray film. Another name
for x ray is radiograph.
Purpose
Chest x rays are ordered for a wide variety of
diagnostic purposes. In fact, this is probably the
most frequently performed x ray. In some cases,
chest x rays are ordered for a single check of an organ’s
condition, and at other times, serial x rays are ordered
to compare to previous studies. Some common rea-
sons for chest x rays include:
Pulmonary disorders
Chest films are frequently ordered to diagnose or
rule outpneumonia. Other pulmonary disorders such
as emphysema or pneumothorax (presence of air or gas
in the chest cavity outside the lungs) may be detected
or evaluated through the use of chest x ray.
Cancer
A chest x ray may be ordered by a physician to
check for possible tumors of the lungs, thyroid, lym-
phoid tissue, or bones of the thorax. These may be
primary tumors. X rays also check for secondary
spread ofcancer from one organ to another.
Cardiac disorders
While less sensitive thanechocardiography, chest
x ray can be used to check for disorders such as con-
gestive heart failureor pulmonary edema.
Other
Tuberculosis can be observed on chest x rays, as
can cardiac disease and damage to the ribs or lungs.
Chest x rays are used to see foreign bodies that may
have been swallowed or inhaled, and to evaluate
response to treatment for various diseases. Often the
chest x ray is also used to verify correct placement of
chest tubes or catheters.
Precautions
Pregnant women, particularly those in the first or
second trimester, should not have chest x rays unless
absolutely necessary. If the exam is ordered, women
who are, or could possibly be, pregnant must wear a
protective lead apron. Because the procedure involves
radiation, care should always be taken to avoid over-
exposure, particularly for children. However, the
amount of radiation from one chest x ray procedure
is minimal.
Description
Routine chest x rays consist of two views, the
frontal view (referred to as posterioranterior or PA)
and the lateral (side) view. It is preferred that the
Chest x ray
patient stand for this exam, particularly when study-
ing collection of fluid in the lungs.
During the actual time of exposure, the technolo-
gist will ask the patient to hold his or her breath. It is
very important in taking a chest x ray to ensure there is
no motion that could detract from the quality and
sharpness of the film image. The procedure will only
take a few minutes and the time patients must hold
their breaths is a matter of a few seconds.
The chest x ray may be performed in a physician’s
office or referred to an outpatient radiology facility or
hospital radiology department. In some cases, particu-
larly for bedridden patients, a portable chest x ray may
be taken. Portable films are sometimes of poorer quality
than those taken with permanent equipment, but are the
best choice for some patients or situations. Bedridden
patients may be placed in as upright a position as pos-
sible to get a clear picture, particularly of chest fluid.
Preparation
There is no advance preparation necessary for
chest x rays. Once the patient arrives at the exam
area, a hospital gown will replace all clothing on the
upper body and all jewelry must be removed.
Aftercare
No aftercare is required by patients who have
chest x rays.
Risks
T h eo n l yr i s ka s s o c i a t e dw i t hc h e s txr a yi sm i n i m a l
exposure to radiation, particularly for pregnant women
and children. Those patients should use protective lead
aprons during the procedure. Technologists are cau-
tioned to carefully check possible dislodging of any
tubes or monitors in the chest area from the patient’s
placement during the exam.
Normal results
A radiologist, or physician specially trained in the
technique and interpretation of x rays, will evaluate
the results. A normal chest x ray will show normal
structures for the age and medical history or the
patient. Findings, whether normal or abnormal, will
be provided to the referring physician in the form of a
written report.
Abnormal results
Abnormal findings on chest x rays are used in
conjunction with a physician’s physical exam findings,
patient medical history and other diagnostic tests to
reach a final diagnosis. For many diseases, chest x rays
are more effective when compared to previous chest
studies. The patient is asked to help the radiology
facility in locating previous chest radiographs from
other facilities.
Pulmonary disorders
Pneumonia shows up on radiographs as patches
and irregular areas of density (from fluid in the lungs).
If the bronchi, which are usually not visible, can
be seen, a diagnosis of bronchial pneumonia may
be made. Shifts or shadows in the hila (lung roots)
may indicate emphysema or a pulmonary abscess.
Widening of the spaces between ribs suggests emphy-
sema. Other pulmonary diseases may also be detected
or suspected through chest x ray.
Cancer
In nearly all patients with lung cancer, some sort
of abnormality can be seen on a chest radiograph.
Hilar masses (enlargements at that part of the lungs
where vessels and nerves enter) are one of the more
common symptoms as are abnormal masses and fluid
buildup on the outside surface of the lungs or sur-
rounding areas. Interstitial lung disease, which is a
large category of disorders, many of which are related
to exposure of substances (such as asbestos fibers),
may be detected on a chest x ray as fiberlike deposits,
often in the lower portions of the lungs.
A normal chest x ray of a child.(Photograph by Peter Berndt, M.D.,
P.A, Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
828 Chest x ray
Other
Congestive heart failure and other cardiac dis-
eases may be indicated on the view of a heart and
lung in a chest radiograph.Fractures of the sternum
and ribs are usually easily detected as breaks on the
chest x ray. In some instances, the radiologist’s view of
the diaphragm may indicate an abdominal problem.
Tuberculosis can also be indicated by elevation of the
diaphragm. Foreign bodies which may have been
swallowed or inhaled can usually be located by the
radiologist as they will look different from any other
tissue or structure in the chest. Serial chest x rays may
be ordered to track changes over a period of time.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway, New York,
NY 10019. (800) 586-4872. <http://
www.lungusa.org>.
Emphysema Anonymous, Inc. P.O. Box 3224, Seminole, FL
34642. (813)391-9977.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Teresa Odle
Chickenpox
Definition
Chickenpox (also called varicella) is a common
and extremely infectious childhood disease that also
affects adults on occasion. It produces an itchy, blis-
tery rash that typically lasts about a week and is some-
times accompanied by a fever or other symptoms.
A single attack of chickenpox almost always brings life-
long immunity against the disease. Because the symp-
toms of chickenpox are easily recognized and in most
cases merely unpleasant rather than dangerous, treat-
ment can almost always be carried out at home. Severe
complications can develop, however, and professional
medical attention is essential in some circumstances.
Description
Before the varicella vaccine (Varivax) was
released for use in 1995, nearly all of the four million
children born each year in the United States con-
tracted chickenpox, resulting in hospitalization in
five of every 1,000 cases and 100 deaths. Chickenpox
is caused by the varicella-zoster virus (a member of the
herpes virus family), which is spread through the air or
by direct contact with an infected person. Once some-
one has been infected with the virus, an incubation
period of about 10–21 days passes before symptoms
begin. The period during which infected people are
able to spread the disease is believed to start one or
two days before the rash breaks out and to continue
until all the blisters have formed scabs, which usually
KEY TERMS
Bronchi— Plural of bronchus. The air passages in
the lungs through which inhaled air passes on its
way to the lungs.
Diaphragm— The large muscle that is located
between the abdomen and the chest area. The dia-
phragm aids in breathing.
Gastrointestinal— The digestive organs and struc-
tures, including the stomach and intestines.
Interstitial lung disease— About 180 diseases fall
into this category of breathing disorders. Injury or
foreign substances in the lungs (such as asbestos
fibers) as well as infections, cancers, or inherited
disorders may cause the diseases. They can lead to
breathing or heart failure.
Lymphoid— Tissues relating to the lymphatic sys-
tem. A thin, yellowish fluid, called lymph fluid,
travels throughout the body. The lymphatic system
helps control fluids in the body.
Portable chest x ray— An x ray procedure taken by
equipment that can be brought to the patient. The
resulting radiographs may not be as high in quality
as stationary x ray radiographs, but allow a technol-
ogist to come to the bedridden patient.
Pulmonary— Refers to the lungs and the breathing
system and function.
Serial x rays— A number of x rays performed at set
times in the disease progression or treatment inter-
vals. The radiographs will be compared to one
another to track changes.
Sternum— Also referred to as the breast bone, this is
the long flat bone in the middle of the chest.
Thorax— The chest area, which runs between the
abdomen and neck and is encased in the ribs.
X ray— A form of electromagnetic radiation with
shorter wavelengths than normal light. X rays can
penetrate most structures.
Chickenpox
happens four to 7 days after the rash breaks out but
may be longer in adolescents and adults. For this
reason, doctors recommend keeping children with
chickenpox away from school for about a week. It is
not necessary, however, to wait until all the scabs have
fallen off.
Chickenpox has been a typical part of growing up
for most children in the industrialized world (although
this may change if the new varicella vaccine becomes
more widely accepted). The disease can strike at any
age, but by ages nine or 10 about 80–90% of American
children have already been infected. U.S. children liv-
ing in rural areas and many foreign-born children are
less likely to be immune. Because almost every case of
chickenpox, no matter how mild, leads to lifelong
protection against further attacks, adults account for
less than 5% of all cases in the United States. Study
results reported by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) indicate that more than 90% of
American adults are immune to the chickenpox virus.
Adults, however, are much more likely than children
to suffer dangerous complications. More than half of
all chickenpox deaths occur among adults.
Causes and symptoms
A case of chickenpox usually starts without warn-
ing or with only a mild fever and a slight feeling of
unwellness. Within a few hours or days small red spots
begin to appear on the scalp, neck, or upper half of the
trunk. After a further 12–24 hours the spots typically
become itchy, fluid-filled bumps called vesicles, which
continue to appear in crops for the next two to five
days. In any area of skin, lesions of a variety of stages
can be seen. These blisters can spread to cover much of
the skin, and in some cases also may be found inside
the mouth, nose, ears, vagina, or rectum. Some people
develop only a few blisters, but in most cases the
number reaches 250–500. The blisters soon begin to
form scabs and fall off. Scarring usually does not
occur unless the blisters have been scratched and
become infected. Occasionally a minor and temporary
darkening of the skin (called hyperpigmentation)i s
noticed around some of the blisters. The degree of
itchiness can range from barely noticeable to extreme.
Some chickenpox sufferers also have headaches,
abdominal pain, or a fever. Full recovery usually
takes five to 10 days after the first symptoms appear.
Again, the most severe cases of the disease tend to be
found among older children and adults.
Although for most people chickenpox is no more
than a matter of a few days’ discomfort, some groups
are at risk for developing complications, the most
common of which are bacterial infections of the blis-
ters, pneumonia, dehydration, encephalitis, and
hepatitis:
/C15Infants. Complications occur much more often
among children less than one year old than among
older children. The threat is greatest to newborns,
who are more at risk ofdeath from chickenpox than
any other group. Under certain circumstances, chil-
dren born to mothers who contract chickenpox just
prior to delivery face an increased possibility of dan-
gerous consequences, including brain damage and
death. If the infection occurs during earlypregnancy,
there is a small (less than 5%) risk of congenital
abnormalities.
/C15Immunocompromised children. Children whose
immune systems have been weakened by a genetic
disorder, disease, or medical treatment usually
experience the most severe symptoms of any group.
They have the second-highest rate of death from
chickenpox.
/C15Adults and children 15 and older. Among this group,
the typical symptoms of chickenpox tend to strike
with greater force, and the risk of complications is
much higher than among young children.
Immediate medical help should always be sought
when anyone in these high-risk groups contracts the
disease.
Diagnosis
Where children are concerned, especially those
with recent exposure to the disease, diagnosis can
usually be made at home, by a school nurse, or by a
doctor over the telephone if the child’s parent or care-
giver is unsure that the disease is chickenpox.
A doctor should be called immediately if:
/C15The child’s fever goes above 102/C14F (38.9/C14C) or takes
more than four days to disappear.
/C15The child’s blisters appear infected. Signs of infection
include leakage of pus from the blisters or excessive
redness, warmth, tenderness, or swelling around the
blisters.
/C15The child seems nervous, confused, unresponsive, or
unusually sleepy; complains of a stiff neck or severe
headache; shows signs of poor balance or has trouble
walking; finds bright lights hard to look at; is having
breathing problems or is coughing a lot; is complain-
ing of chest pain; isvomiting repeatedly; or is having
convulsions. These may be signs ofReye’s syndrome
or encephalitis, two rare but potentially dangerous
conditions.
830 Chickenpox
Treatment
With children, treatment usually takes place in the
home and focuses on reducing discomfort and fever.
Because chickenpox is a viral disease,antibiotics are
ineffective against it.
Applying wet compresses or bathing the child in
cool or lukewarm water once a day can help the itch.
Adding four to eight ounces of baking soda or one or
two cups of oatmeal to the bath is a good idea (oat-
meal bath packets are sold by pharmacies). Only mild
soap should be used in the bath. Patting, not rubbing,
is recommended for drying the child off, to prevent
irritating the blisters. Calamine lotion (and some other
kinds of lotions) also help to reduce itchiness. Because
scratching can cause blisters to become infected and
lead to scarring, the child’s nails should be cut short.
Of course, older children need to be warned not to
scratch. For babies, light mittens or socks on the
hands can help guard against scratching.
If mouth blisters make eating or drinking an
unpleasant experience, cold drinks and soft, bland
foods can ease the child’s discomfort. Painful genital
blisters can be treated with an anesthetic cream recom-
mended by a doctor or pharmacist. Antibiotics often
are prescribed if blisters become infected.
Fever and discomfort can be reduced byacetami-
nophen or another medication that does not contain
aspirin. Aspirin and any medications that contain
aspirin or other salicylates must not be used with
chickenpox, for they appear to increase the chances
of developing Reye’s syndrome. The best idea is to
consult a doctor or pharmacist if unsure about which
medications are safe.
Immunocompromised chickenpox sufferers are
sometimes given an antiviral drug called acyclovir
(Zovirax). Studies have shown that Zovirax also les-
sens the symptoms of otherwise healthy children and
adults who contract chickenpox, but the suggestion
that it should be used to treat the disease among
the general population, especially in children, is
controversial.
Alternative treatment
Alternative practitioners seek to lessen the dis-
comfort and fever caused by chickenpox. Like other
practitioners, they suggest cool or lukewarm baths.
Rolled oats (Avena sativa) in the bath water help
relieve itching. (Oats should be placed in a sock, that
is turned in the bath water to release the milky anti-
itch properties.) Other recommended remedies for
itching include applying aloe vera, witch hazel, or
herbal preparations of rosemary (Rosmarinus officina-
lis) and calendula (Calendual officinalis) to the blisters.
Homeopathic remedies are selected on a case by case
basis. Some common remedy choices are tartar emetic
(antimonium tartaricum), windflower (pulsatilla), poi-
son ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), and sulphur.
Prognosis
Most cases of chickenpox run their course within
a week without causing lasting harm. However, there
is one long-term consequence of chickenpox that
strikes about 20% of the population, particularly peo-
ple 50 and older. Like all herpes viruses, the varicella-
zoster virus never leaves the body after an episode
of chickenpox, but lies dormant in the nerve cells,
where it may be reactivated years later by disease or
A five-year-old girl with chickenpox. The first symptom of the
disease is the rash that is evident on the girl’s back and neck.
The rash and the mild fever that accompanies it should dis-
appear in a week or two. (Photograph by Jim Selby, Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
Chickenpox
age-related weakening of the immune system. The
result isshingles (also called herpes zoster), a painful
nerve inflammation, accompanied by a rash, that
usually affects the trunk or the face for 10 days or
more. Especially in the elderly, pain, called postherpe-
tic neuralgia, may persist at the site of the shingles for
months or years. Two relatively newer drugs for treat-
ment of shingles have become available. Both valacy-
clovir (Valtrex) and famciclovir (Famvir) stop the
replication of herpes zoster when administered within
72 hours of appearance of the rash. The effectiveness
of these two drugs in immunocompromised patients
has not been established, and Famvir was not recom-
mended for patients under 18 years.
Prevention
A substance known as varicella-zoster immune
globulin (VZIG), which reduces the severity of
chickenpox symptoms, is available to treat immuno-
compromised children and others at high risk of devel-
oping complications. It is administered by injection
within 96 hours of known or suspected exposure to
the disease and is not useful after that. VZIG is pro-
duced as a gamma globulin from blood of recently
infected individuals.
A vaccine for chickenpox became available in the
United States in 1995 under the name Varivax. Varivax
is a live, attenuated (weakened) virus vaccine. It has
been proven to be 85% effective for preventing all cases
of chickenpox and close to 100% effective in preventing
severe cases. Side effects are normally limited to occa-
sional soreness or redness at the injection site. CDC
guidelines state that the vaccine should be given to all
children (with the exception of certain high-risk groups)
at 12–18 months of age, preferably when they receive
their measles-mumps-rubella vaccine. For older child-
ren, up to age 12, the CDC recommendsvaccination
when a reliable determination that the child in question
has already had chickenpox cannot be made.
Vaccination also is recommended for any older child
or adult considered susceptible to the disease, particu-
larly those, such as health care workers and women of
childbearing age, who face a greater likelihood of severe
illness or transmitting infection. A single dose of the
vaccine was once thought sufficient for children up to
age 12; older children and adults received a second dose
four to eight weeks later. However, an outbreak at a
daycare center in 2000 brought concern in the medical
community about a second vaccination for younger
children, since many of the affected children had been
vaccinated. Researchers began recommending a second
vaccination in 2002. In 1997 the cost of two adult doses
of the vaccine in the United States was about $80.
Although this cost was not always covered by health
insurance plans, children up to age 18 without access to
the appropriate coverage could be vaccinated free of
charge through the federal Vaccines for Children
KEY TERMS
Acetaminophen— A drug for relieving pain and
fever. Tylenol is the most common example.
Acyclovir— An antiviral drug used for combating
chickenpox and other herpes viruses. Sold under
the name Zovirax.
Dehydration— Excessive water loss by the body.
Encephalitis— A disease that inflames the brain.
Hepatitis— A disease that inflames the liver.
Immune system— A biochemical complex that pro-
tects the body against pathogenic organisms and
other foreign bodies.
Immunocompromised— Havingadamagedimmune
system.
Pneumonia— A disease that inflames the lungs.
Pus— A thick yellowish or greenish fluid containing
inflammatory cells. Usually caused by bacterial
infection.
Reye’s syndrome— A rare but often fatal disease
that involves the brain, liver, and kidneys.
Salicylates— Substances containing salicylic acid,
which are used for relieving pain and fever. Aspirin
is the most common example.
Shingles— A disease (also called herpes zoster) that
causes a rash and a very painful nerve inflamma-
tion. An attack of chickenpox will eventually give
rise to shingles in about 20% of the population.
Trunk— That part of the body that does not include
the head, arms, and legs.
Varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG)— A sub-
stance that can reduce the severity of chickenpox
symptoms.
Varicella-zoster virus— The virus that causes
chickenpox and shingles.
Varivax— A vaccine forthe prevention ofchickenpox.
Virus— A tiny particle that can cause infections by
duplicating itself inside a cell using the cell’s own
software. Antibiotics are ineffective against viruses,
though antiviral drugs exist for some viruses,
including chickenpox.
832 Chickenpox
program. Varivax is not given to patients who already
have overt signs of the disease. It was once thought
unsafe for children with chronickidney disease,b u ta
2003 report said the vaccination was safe in these chil-
dren. The finding is important, since even chickenpox
can be a serious complication in children who must
undergo a kidney transplant.
The vaccine also is not recommended for pregnant
women, and women should delay pregnancy for three
months following a complete vaccination. The vaccine
is useful when given early after exposure to chicken-
pox and, if given in the midst of the incubation period,
it can be preventative. The Infectious Diseases Society
of America stated in 2000 that immunization is recom-
mended for all adults who have never had chickenpox.
While there was initial concern regarding the vac-
cine’s safety and effectiveness when first released, the
vaccination is gaining acceptance as numerous states
require it for admittance into daycare or public school.
In 2000, 59% of toddlers in the United States were
immunized; up from 43.2% in 1998. A study published
in 2001 indicates that the varicella vaccine is highly
effective when used in clinical practice. Although evi-
dence has not ruled out a booster shot later in life, all
research addressing the vaccine’s effectiveness through-
out its six-year use indicates that chickenpox may be the
first human herpes virus to be wiped out. Although initial
concerns questioned if the vaccination might make shin-
gles more likely, studies are beginning to show the effec-
tiveness of the vaccine in reducing cases of that disease.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Arvin, Ann M. ‘‘Varicella Vaccine–The First Six Years.’’
New England Journal of MedicineMarch 2001.
‘‘Chickenpox Vaccine OK for Pediatric Patients.’’Vaccine
Weekly January 22, 2003: 25.
Henderson, C. W. ‘‘Chickenpox Immunization Confirmed
Effective in Adults.’’Vaccine Weekly September 2000:
22.
‘‘Study: Two Vaccines Work Best.’’Vaccine Weekly
January 8, 2003: 14.
ORGANIZATIONS
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National
Immunization Hotline. 1600 Clifton Rd. NE, Atlanta,
GA 30333. (800) 232-2522 (English). (800) 232-0233
(Spanish). <http://www.cdc.gov>.
OTHER
ABCNEWS.com. ‘‘Varicella Vaccine: States Mandate
Chickenpox Immunization.’’ August 1, 2000. [cited
May 3, 2001]. <http://abcnews.go.com/sections/living/
DailyNews/chickenpox_vaccine0802.html>.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ‘‘Prevention of
Varicella: Recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).’’ July
12, 1996. [cited December 12, 1997]. <http://aepo-xdv-
www.epo.cdc.gov/wonder/prevguid/m0042990/
entire.htm>.
Beth A. Kapes
Teresa G. Odle
Child abuse
Definition
Child abuse is the blanket term to describe four
types of child mistreatment: physical abuse, sexual
abuse, emotional abuse, and neglect. In many cases
children are the victims of more than one type of
abuse. The abusers can be parents or other family
members, caretakers such as teachers and babysitters,
acquaintances (including other children), and (in rare
instances) strangers.
Description
Prevalence of abuse
Child abuse was once viewed as a minor social
problem affecting only a handful of United States
children. However, it has begun to closer attention
from the media, law enforcement, and the helping
professions. With increased public and professional
awareness has come a sharp rise in the number of
reported cases. But because abuse often is hidden
from view and its victims too young or fearful to
speak out, experts suggest that its true prevalence is
possibly much greater than the official data indicate.
In 1996, more than three million victims of alleged
abuse were reported to child protective services
(CPS) agencies in the United States, and the reports
were substantiated in more than one million cases. Put
another way, 1.5% of the country’s children were
confirmed victims of abuse in 1996. Parents were the
abusers in 77% of the confirmed cases, other relatives
in 11%. Sexual abuse was more likely to be committed
by males, whereas females were responsible for the
majority of neglect cases. More than 1,000 United
States children died from abuse in 1996. A 2004 report
said that nearly 17% of adult women and 8% of adult
men had been abused as children. The United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF) reported in early 2004
that nearly 3,500 children younger than age 15 die
every year from physical abuse and neglect in the 27
richest nations in the world.
Child abuse
Although experts are quick to point out that abuse
occurs among all social, ethnic, and income groups,
reported cases usually involve poor families with little
education. Young mothers, single-parent families, and
parental alcohol or drug abuse also are common in
reported cases. Charles F. Johnson remarks, ‘‘More
than 90% of abusing parents have neither psychotic
nor criminal personalities. Rather they tend to be
lonely, unhappy, angry, young, and single parents
who do not plan their pregnancies, have little or no
knowledge of child development, and have unrealistic
expectations for child behavior.’’ About 10%, or per-
haps as many as 40%, of abusive parents were them-
selves physically abused as children, but most abused
children do not grow up to be abusive parents.
Types of abuse
PHYSICAL ABUSE. Physical abuse is the nonacciden-
tal infliction of physical injury to a child. The abuser is
usually a family member or other caretaker, and is more
likely to be male. In 1996, 24% of the confirmed cases
of United States child abuse involved physical abuse.
A rare form of physical abuse isMunchausen syn-
drome by proxy, in which a caretaker (most often the
mother) seeks attention by making the child sick or
appear to be sick.
SEXUAL ABUSE. Charles F. Johnson defines child
sexual abuse as ‘‘any activity with a child, before the
age of legal consent, that is for the sexual gratification of
an adult or a significantly older child.’’ It includes,
among other things, sexual touching and penetration,
persuading a child to expose his or her sexual organs,
and allowing a child to view pornography. In most cases
the child is related to or knows the abuser, and about
one in five abusers are themselves underage. Sexual
abuse was present in 12% of the confirmed 1996 abuse
cases. An estimated 20–25% of females and 10–15% of
males report that they were sexually abused by age 18.
The 1990s and early 2000s were rocked by reports
of sexual abuse of children committed by Catholic
priests. Most of the abuse appeared to have occurred
during the 1970s and a prominent report released early
in 2004 stated that as many as 10,667 children were
sexually abused by more than 4,300 priests. Increases
also have been seen in recent years in child pornogra-
phy cases, where children are the subjects of porno-
graphy, particularly on the Internet.
EMOTIONAL ABUSE. Emotional abuse, according to
Richard D. Krugman, ‘‘has been defined as the rejection,
ignoring, criticizing, isolation, or terrorizing of children,
all of which have the effect of eroding their self-esteem.’’
Emotional abuse usually expresses itself in verbal attacks
involving rejection, scapegoating, belittlement, and so
forth. Because it often accompanies other types of
abuse and is difficult to prove, it is rarely reported, and
accounted for only 6% of the confirmed 1996 cases.
NEGLECT. Neglect—failure to satisfy a child’s basic
needs—can assume many forms. Physical neglect is the
failure (beyond the constraints imposed by poverty) to
provide adequate food, clothing, shelter, or supervi-
sion. Emotional neglect is the failure to satisfy a child’s
normal emotional needs, or behavior that damages a
child’s normal emotional and psychological develop-
ment (such as permitting drug abuse in the home).
Failing to see that a child receives proper schooling or
medical care is also considered neglect. In 1996 neglect
was the finding in 52% of the confirmed abuse cases.
Causes and symptoms
Physical abuse
The usual physical abuse scenario involves a par-
ent who loses control and lashes out at a child. The
trigger may be normal child behavior such as crying or
dirtying a diaper. Unlike nonabusive parents, who
may become angry at or upset with their children
from time to time but are genuinely loving, abusive
parents tend to harbor deep-rooted negative feelings
toward their children.
Unexplained or suspiciousbruises or other marks
on the skin are typical signs of physical abuse, as are
burns. Skull and other bonefractures are often seen in
young abused children, and in fact, head injuries are the
leading cause ofdeath from abuse. Children less than
one year old are particularly vulnerable to injury from
shaking. This is calledshaken baby syndromeor shaken
impact syndrome. Not surprisingly, physical abuse also
causes a wide variety of behavioral changes in children.
Sexual abuse
John M. Leventhal observes, ‘‘The two prerequi-
sites for this form of maltreatment include sexual arou-
sal to children and the willingness to act on this arousal.
Factors that may contribute to this willingness include
alcohol or drug abuse, poor impulse control, and a belief
that the sexual behaviors are acceptable and not harm-
ful to the child.’’ The chances of abuse are higher if the
child is developmentally handicapped or vulnerable in
some other way.
Genital or anal injuries or abnormalities (including
the presence ofsexually transmitted diseases)c a nb e
signs of sexual abuse, but often there is no physical
evidence for a doctor to find. In fact, physical examina-
tions of children in cases of suspected sexual abuse
834 Child abuse
supply grounds for further suspicion only 15–20% of
the time. Anxiety, poor academic performance, and
suicidal conduct are some of the behavioral signs of
sexual abuse, but are also found in children suffering
other kinds ofstress. Excessive masturbation and other
unusually sexualized kinds of behavior are more closely
associated with sexual abuse itself.
Emotional abuse
Emotional abuse can happen in many settings: at
home, at school, on sports teams, and so on. Some of
the possible symptoms include loss of self-esteem,
sleep disturbances, headaches or stomach aches,
school avoidance, and running away from home.
Neglect
Many cases of neglect occur because the parent
experiences strong negative feelings toward the child.
At other times, the parent may truly care about the
child, but lack the ability or strength to adequately
provide for the child’s needs because he or she is
handicapped by depression, drug abuse,mental retar-
dation, or some other problem.
Child Abuse: Signs And Symptoms
Although these signs do not necessarily indicate that a child has been abused, they may help adults recognize that something is wrong. The possiblity of abuse should
be investigated if a child shows a number of these symptoms, or any of them to a marked degree:
Sexual Abuse
Being overly affectionate or knowledgeable in a sexual way inappropriate to the child’s age
Medical problems such as chronic itching, pain in the genitals, venereal diseases
Other extreme reactions, such as depression, self-mutilation, suicide attempts, running away, overdoses, anorexia
Personality changes such as becoming insecure or clinging
Regressing to younger behavior patterns such as thumb sucking or bringing out discarded cuddly toys
Sudden loss of appetite or compulsive eating
Being isolated or withdrawn
Inability to concentrate
Lack of trust or fear someone they know well, such as not wanting to be alone with a babysitter
Starting to wet bed again, day or night/nightmares
Become worried about clothing being removed
Suddenly drawing sexually explicit pictures
Trying to be ‘‘ultra-good’’ or perfect; overreacting to criticism
Physical Abuse
Unexplained recurrent injuries or burns
Improbable excuses or refusal to explain injuries
Wearing clothes to cover injuries, even in hot weather
Refusal to undress for gym
Bald patches
Chronic running away
Fear of medical help or examination
Self-destructive tendencies
Aggression towards others
Fear of physical contact—shrinking back if touched
Admitting that they are punished, but the punishment is excessive (such as a child being beaten every night to ‘‘make him/her study’’)
Fear of suspected abuser being contacted
Emotional Abuse
Physical, mental, and emotional development lags
Sudden speech disorders
Continual self-depreciation (‘‘I’m stupid, ugly, worthless, etc.’’)
Overreaction to mistakes
Extreme fear of any new situation
Inappropriate response to pain (‘‘I deserve this’’)
Neurotic behavior (rocking, hair twisting, self-mutilation)
Extremes of passivity or aggression
Neglect
Constant hunger
Poor personal hygiene
No social relationships
Constant tiredness
Poor state of clothing
Compulsive scavenging Emaciation
Untreated medical problems
Destructive tendencies
A child may be subjected to a combination of different kinds of abuse. It is also possible that a child may show no outward signs and hide what is happeningfrom everyone.
Child abuse
Neglected children often do not receive adequate
nourishment or emotional and mental stimulation.
As a result, their physical, social, emotional, and
mental development is hindered. They may, for
instance, be underweight, develop language skills less
quickly than other children, and seem emotionally
needy.
Diagnosis
Doctors and many other professionals who work
with children are required by law to report suspected
abuse to their state’s Child Protective Services (CPS)
agency. Abuse investigations often are a group effort
involving medical personnel, social workers, police offi-
cers, and others. Some hospitals and communities main-
tain child protection teams that respond to cases of
possible abuse. Careful questioning of the parents is
crucial, as is interviewing the child (if he or she is capable
of being interviewed). The investigators must ensure,
however, that their questioning does not further trau-
matize the child. Aphysical examinationfor signs of
abuse or neglect is, of course, always necessary, and
may include x rays, blood tests, and other procedures.
Treatment
Notification of the appropriate authorities, treat-
ment of the child’s injuries, and protecting the child
from further harm are the immediate priorities in
abuse cases. If the child does not require hospital
treatment, protection often involves placing him or
her with relatives or in foster care. Once the immediate
concerns are dealt with, it becomes essential to deter-
mine how the child’s long-term medical, psychologi-
cal, educational, and other needs can best be met, a
process that involves evaluating not only the child’s
needs but also the family’s (such as for drug abuse
counseling or parental skills training). If the child has
brothers or sisters, the authorities must determine
whether they have been abused as well. On investiga-
tion, signs of physical abuse are discovered in about
20% of the brothers and sisters of abused children.
Prognosis
Child abuse can have lifelong consequences.
Research shows that abused children and adolescents
are more likely, for instance, to do poorly in school,
suffer emotional problems, develop an antisocial per-
sonality, become promiscuous, abuse drugs and alco-
hol, and attemptsuicide. As adults they often have
trouble establishing intimate relationships. Whether
professional treatment is able to moderate the long-
term psychological effects of abuse is a question that
remains unanswered.
Prevention
Government efforts to prevent abuse include
home-visitor programs aimed at high-risk families
and school-based efforts to teach children how
to respond to attempted sexual abuse. Emotional
abuse prevention has been promoted through the
media.
When children reach age three, parents should
begin teaching them about ‘‘bad touches’’ and about
confiding in a suitable adult if they are touched or
treated in a way that makes them uneasy. Parents also
need to exercise caution in hiring babysitters and
other caretakers. Anyone who suspects abuse should
immediately report those suspicions to the police or
his or her local CPS agency, which will usually be
listed in the blue pages of the telephone book under
Rehabilitative Services or Child and Family Services,
or in the yellow pages. Round-the-clock crisis coun-
seling for children and adults is offered by the
Childhelp USA/IOF Foresters National Child
Abuse Hotline. The National Committee to Prevent
Child Abuse is an excellent source of information on
the many support groups and other organizations
that help abused and at-risk children and their
families. One of these or ganizations, National
Parents Anonymous, sponsors 2,100 local self-help
groups throughout the United States, Canada, and
Europe. Telephone numbers for its local groups are
listed in the white pages of the telephone book under
Parents Anonymous or can be obtained by calling the
national headquarters.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Jellinek, Michael S. ‘‘Making the Call: Identifying Child
Sexual Abuse.’’Pediatric NewsMarch 2004: 26.
Plante, Thomas G. ‘‘Another Aftershock: What Have We
Learned from the John Jay Report?’’America March
22, 2004: 10.
‘‘UNICEF Report on Child Abuse in Developed
Nations.’’ Public Health ReportsMarch–April 2004:
220–224.
ORGANIZATIONS
Childhelp USA/IOF Foresters National Child Abuse
Hotline. (800) 422-4453.
National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect
Information. P.O. Box 1182, Washington, DC 20013-
1182. (800) 394-3366. <http://www.calib.com/
nccanch>.
836 Child abuse
National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse. 200
S. Michigan Ave., 17th Floor, Chicago, IL 60604. (312)
663-3520. <http://www.childabuse.org>.
National Parents Anonymous. 675 W. Foothill Blvd., Suite
220, Claremont, CA 91711. (909) 621-6184.
Howard Baker
Teresa G. Odle
Child development see Children’s health
Child safety see Children’s health
Childbirth
Definition
Childbirth includes both labor (the process of
birth) and delivery (the birth itself); it refers to the
entire process as an infant makes its way from the
womb down the birth canal to the outside world.
Description
Childbirth usually begins spontaneously, about
280 days after conception, but it may be started
by artificial means if thepregnancy continues past
42 weeks gestation. The average length of labor is
about 14 hours for a first pregnancy and about eight
hours in subsequent pregnancies. However, many
women experience a much longer or shorter labor.
Labor can be described in terms of a series of
phases.
First stage of labor
During the first phase of labor, the cervix dilates
(opens) from 0–10 cm. This phase has an early, or
latent, phase and an active phase. During the latent
phase, progress is usually very slow. It may take quite
a while and many contractions before the cervix
dilates the first few centimeters. Contractions increase
in strength as labor progresses. Most women are rela-
tively comfortable during the latent phase and walking
around is encouraged, since it naturally stimulates the
process.
As labor begins, the muscular wall of the uterus
begins to contract as the cervix relaxes and expands. As
a portion of the amniotic sac surrounding the baby is
pushed into the opening, it bursts under the pressure,
releasing amniotic fluid. This is called ‘‘breaking the
bag of waters.’’
During a contraction, the infant experiences
intense pressure that pushes it against the cervix, even-
tually forcing the cervix to stretch open. At the same
time, the contractions cause the cervix to thin. During
this first stage, a woman’s contractions occur more
and more often and last longer and longer. The doctor
or nurse will do a periodicpelvic exam to determine
how the mother is progressing. If the contractions
aren’t forceful enough to open the cervix, a drug may
be given to make the uterus contract.
As pain and discomfort increase, women may be
tempted to request pain medication. If possible,
though, administration of pain medication or anes-
thetics should be delayed until the active phase of
labor begins—at which point the medication will not
act to slow down or stop the labor.
The active stage of labor is faster and more effi-
cient than the latent phase. In this phase, contractions
are longer and more regular, usually occurring about
every two minutes. These stronger contractions are
also more painful. Women who use the breathing
exercises learned in childbirth classes find that these
can help cope with the pain experienced during this
phase. Many women also receive some pain medica-
tion at this point—either a short-term medication,
such as Nubain or Numorphan, or an epidural
anesthesia.
As the cervix dilates to 8–9 cm, the phase called
the transition begins. This refers to the transition from
the first phase (during which the cervix dilates from
0–10 cm) and the second phase (during which the baby
is pushed out through the birth canal). As the baby’s
head begins to descend, women begin to feel the urge
to ‘‘push’’ or bear down. Active pushing by the mother
Placenta
Uterus
Umbilical cord
Vagina
Cervix
Stage 1: Dilation of the cervix
Stage 1: Dilation of the cervix.(Illustration by Hans & Cassady.)
Childbirth