DISEASE: Cystitis UTI
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

replace the natural organisms that flourish in the
bowel, many health benefits can be expected from
colonic irrigation. In general, alternative practitioners
maintain that an ill-functioning bowel is the source of
all disease, and therefore keeping it clean will be an
effective protection against this.
Removing large amounts of toxic matter relieves
the patient and can lead to the alleviation of symptoms
such as arthritis,chronic fatigue syndrome, candidiasis,
and a host of other illnesses. Properly executed, colo-
nic irrigation can help restore normal peristaltic action
to a sluggish bowel, thus reducing the need for more
hydrotherapy treatments over time. In addition,
removing the layer of fecal matter which coats the
intestines in many individuals allows improved assim-
ilation of the nutrients from foods and can alleviate
symptoms of vitamin and other nutrient deficiencies.
Many alternative health practitioners consider some
form of hydrotherapy for the bowel to be essential in
the treatment of degenerative diseases.
Description
Origins
Cleansing the colon with the use of hydrotherapy
is not a new concept. Forms of colonic irrigation have
been used successfully for decades to relieve chronic
toxicity and even acute cases of toxemia.
Over time, many people develop a thick layer of
fecal matter that coats their colon. It hardens and
becomes impacted, reducing the efficiency of the
bowel, and in some cases, completely obstructing nor-
mal elimination of waste matter from the body. It is
quite common for people to have only one bowel
movement per day, and some as few as one or two
per week.
Alternative practitioners advise that we probably
should have one bowel movement for every meal that
we eat. If not, then we are not eliminating wastes
completely, and if input exceeds output, then we will
surely suffer the consequences at some point.
Incomplete elimination of body wastes may
result in the following, depending on where the
deposits end up:
/C15sluggish system
/C15joint pain and arthritis
/C15irritable bowel syndrome
/C15diverticulitis
/C15Crohn’s disease
/C15leaky gut syndrome
/C15heart problem
/C15migraine
/C15allergies
/C15bad breath
/C15acne and other skin problems such as psoriasis
/C15asthma
/C15early senility andAlzheimer’s disease
/C15chronic fatigue syndrome
/C15cancer, particularly of the bowel
/C15multiple sclerosis
During colonic irrigation, a small speculum is
passed into the patient’s bowel through the rectum.
This is attached to a tube, which leads to a machine
that pumps temperature-controlled water into the
colon at a controlled rate (to be controlled by either
the practitioner or the patient). The temperature of the
water should ideally be kept as close to body tempera-
ture as possible.
The patient will temporarily be filled with water
up to the level of the entire colon. Patients say they can
feel the water up under their ribs but that the process,
although sometimes uncomfortable, is not painful.
The amount of water will vary but will generally be
in the region of between two and six liters (or quarts)
at any one time. This triggers peristaltic action and the
patient will begin to expel the water along with fecal
matter back through the tube and into the machine.
The fecal matter is flushed out through a viewing
tube, so that what is eliminated may be monitored.
Quite often, unsuspected parasites are expelled, along
with very old fecal material, very dark in color, which
may have been in the colon for years. Some therapists
comment that it looks like aging rubber.
During the treatment, the therapist will gently
massage the patient’s abdomen to help dislodge
impacted fecal matter. In addition to massage, some-
times acupressure, reflexology, or lymphatic drainage
techniques may be used to loosen deposits and stimu-
late the bowel. It is important that the right amount of
water is used, as too much will cause discomfort and
too little will be ineffective. If correctly done, colonic
irrigation is not painful at all and some patients claim
to sleep through their treatment.
Sanitation is vital to this process. The tubes and
speculums used are generally disposable, but other
parts of the machine, such as the viewing tube, must
be sterilized after each patient.
Normally, a series of treatments will be required
to achieve desired results regarding the elimination of
Colonic irrigation
impacted, decaying matter, and restoration of bowel
regularity. Initially only gas and recent fecal matter
may be expelled. The residue attached to the colon
wall is usually the result of years of neglect, and thera-
pists say that one cannot expect complete relief in only
one session.
Impacted fecal matter can cause an imbalance of
the natural organisms that normally populate the
bowel, causing what is known as dysbiosis. Under
ideal conditions, the bowel is populated by a variety
of naturally occurring organisms. It seems that the
enzymes occurring in fresh fruit and vegetables encou-
rage these beneficial organisms. One of the results of
eating processed denatured foods is that this natural
balance is upset, and food may begin to rot in the
bowel instead of being processed.
Decomposing matter can cause a toxic condition
and may lead to many health problems, asconstipation
causes backed up pollution of the body cells. The
process of repair and elimination of wastes enters a
downward spiral which at best will cause fatigue, lack
of energy and premature aging, and, at worst, can
cause degenerative diseases, among them allergies,
and even cancer and Alzheimer’s disease.
The cost of colonic irrigation treatments varies,
but is generally between $35–70 per session, which
may last from 45 minutes to one hour. The cost of
the machine itself ranges from $4,000–12,000, but
again, it should be noted that only qualified therapists
should conduct sessions.
Preparations
Most practitioners prefer that distilled or purified
water is used for colonic irrigation, but others use
sterilized tap water.
Precautions
It may be advisable to use a probiotic pessary after
colonic irrigation, to ensure replacement of desirable
natural flora. There are certain conditions that either
partly or completely preclude the use of colonic irriga-
tion, such as an active attack of Crohn’s disease, bleed-
ing ulcers, and hyperacidosis. If in doubt, a qualified
practitioner should be consulted. Anyone suffering
from these conditions should always notify the practi-
tioner when receiving colonic irrigation treatments.
Side effects
Some allopathic practitioners claim that colonic
irrigation flushes out essential electrolytes and friendly
bacteria from the bowel and that it can be dangerous.
Practitioners counter that this can easily be remedied
with the use of probiotics, and that in any case, these
possible disadvantages are easily offset by the benefits
of having large amounts of putrefying matter, harmful
organisms, and parasites removed from the system.
Research and general acceptance
Although many alternative health care practi-
tioners swear by colonic irrigation, there is a large allo-
pathic lobby that claims that there are no benefits to be
had, and that there are dangers involved. However,
there are many decades of records and research from
the alternative health care community that indicate that
this therapy may have a valuable place in the treatment
of degenerative diseases and toxic conditions.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
California Colon Hygienist Society. 333 Miller Ave., Suite 1,
Mill Valley, CA 94941. (415) 383-7224.
Intestinal Health Institute. 4427 East Fifth St., Tucson, AZ
85711. (520) 325-9686. info@sheilas.com. <http://
www.sheilas.com>.
Patricia Skinner
Colonoscopy
Definition
Colonoscopy is a medical procedure where a long,
flexible, tubular instrument called the colonoscope is
used to view the entire inner lining of the colon (large
intestine) and the rectum.
KEY TERMS
Dysbiosis— The condition that results when the
natural flora of the gut are thrown out of balance,
such as when antibiotics are taken.
Peristalsis— The natural wave-like action of a
healthy bowel that transports matter from one end
of the bowel to the other.
Probiotics— Supplements of beneficial microor-
ganisms that normally colonize the gut.
Toxemia— Poisoning of the blood.
942 Colonoscopy
Purpose
A colonoscopy is generally recommended when the
patient complains of rectal bleeding or has a change in
bowel habits and other unexplained abdominal symp-
toms. The test is frequently used to test for colorectal
cancer, especially when polyps or tumor-like growths
have been detected using thebarium enemaand other
diagnostic tests. Polyps can be removed through the
colonoscope and samples of tissue (biopsies) can be
taken to test for the presence of cancerous cells.
The test also enables the physician to check for
bowel diseases such asulcerative colitis and Crohn’s
disease. It is a necessary tool in monitoring patients
who have a past history of polyps orcolon cancer.
Description
The procedure can be done either in the doctor’s
office or in a special procedure room of a local hospi-
tal. An intravenous (IV) line will be started in a vein in
the arm. The patient is generally given a sedative and a
pain-killer through the IV line.
During the colonoscopy, the patient will be asked
to lie on his/her left side with his/her knees drawn up
towards the abdomen. The doctor begins the proce-
dure by inserting a lubricated, gloved finger into the
anus to check for any abnormal masses or blockage. A
thin, well-lubricated colonoscope then will be inserted
into the anus and it will be gently advanced through
the colon. The lining of the intestine will be examined
through the scope. Occasionally air may be pumped
through the colonoscope to help clear the path or open
the colon. If there are excessive secretions, stool, or
blood that obstruct the viewing, they will be suctioned
out through the scope. The doctor may press on the
abdomen or ask the patient to change his/her position
in order to advance the scope through the colon.
The entire length of the large intestine can be exam-
ined in this manner. If suspicious growths are observed,
tiny biopsy forceps or brushes can be inserted through
the colon and tissue samples can be obtained. Small
polyps also can be removed through the colonoscope.
After the procedure, the colonoscope is slowly with-
drawn and the instilled air is allowed to escape. The
anal area is then cleansed with tissues.
The procedure may take anywhere from 30 minutes
to two hours depending on how easy it is to advance the
scope through the colon. Colonoscopy can be a long
and uncomfortable procedure, and the bowel cleaning
preparation may be tiring and can producediarrheaand
cramping. During the colonoscopy, the sedative and the
pain medications will keep the patient very drowsy and
relaxed. Most patients complain of minor discomfort
and pressure from the colonoscope moving inside.
However, the procedure is not painful.
A procedure called virtual colonoscopy has been
developed but debate continues on whether or not it is
effective as colonoscopy. Virtual colonoscopy refers to
the use of imaging, usually withcomputed tomography
(CT) scans or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
to produce images of the colon. Studies in late 2003
showed that virtual colonoscopy was as effective as
colonoscopy for screening purposes and it offered the
advantage of being less invasive and less risky.
However, many physicians were unwilling to accept
it as a replacement for colonoscopy, particularly since
some patients might still require the regular colono-
scopy as a follow-up to the virtual procedure if a polyp
or abnormality is found that requires biopsy.
Preparation
The doctor should be notified if the patient has
allergies to any medications or anesthetics; any bleed-
ing problems; or if the woman is pregnant. The doctor
should also be informed of all the medications that the
person is currently on and if he or she has had a
barium x-ray examination recently. If the patient has
had heart valves replaced, the doctor should be
informed so that appropriateantibiotics can be admi-
nistered to prevent any chance of infection. The risks
of the procedure will be explained to the patient before
performing the procedure and the patient will be asked
to sign a consent form.
It is important that the colon be thoroughly
cleaned before performing the examination. Before
the examination, considerable preparation is neces-
sary to clear the colon of all stool. The patient will be
asked to refrain from eating any solid food for 24–48
hours before the test. Only clear liquids such as juices,
broth, and gelatin are recommended. The patient is
advised to drink plenty of water to avoiddehydration.
The evening before the test, the patient will have to
take a strong laxative that the doctor has prescribed.
Several 1 qtenemas of warm tap water may have to be
taken on the morning of the exam. Commercial ene-
mas (e.g., Fleet) may be used.
The patient will be given specific instructions on
how to use the enema and how many such enemas are
necessary. Generally, the procedure has to be repeated
until the return from the enema is clear of stool parti-
cles. On the morning of the examination, the patient is
instructed not to eat or drink anything. The prepara-
tory procedures are extremely important since, if the
colon is not thoroughly clean, the exam cannot be done.
Colonoscopy
Aftercare
After the procedure, the patient is kept under
observation until the effects of the medications wear
off. The patient will have to be driven home by some-
one and can generally resume a normal diet and usual
activities unless otherwise instructed. The patient will
be advised to drink lots of fluids to replace those lost
by laxatives and fasting.
For a few hours after the procedure, the patient
may feel groggy. There may be some abdominal
cramping and considerable amount of gas may be
passed. If a biopsy was performed or a polyp was
removed, there may be small amounts of blood in the
stool for a few days. If the patient experiences severe
abdominal pain or has persistent and heavy bleeding,
it should be brought to the doctor’s attention
immediately.
Risks
The procedure is virtually free of any complica-
tions and risks. Very rarely (two in 1000 cases) there
may be a perforation (a hole) in the intestinal wall.
Heavy bleeding due to the removal of the polyp or
from the biopsy site seldom occurs (one in 1000 cases).
Infections due to a colonoscopy are also extremely
rare. Patients with artificial or abnormal heart valves
are usually given antibiotics before and after the pro-
cedure to prevent an infection.
Normal results
The results are said to be normal if the lining of the
colon is a pale reddish pink and no abnormal looking
masses are found in the lining of the colon.
Abnormal results
Abnormal results would imply that polyps or
other suspicious-looking masses were detected in the
lining of the intestine. Polyps can be removed during
the procedure and tissue samples can be biopsied. If
cancerous cells are detected in the tissue samples, then
a diagnosis of colon cancer is made. The pathologist
analyzes the tumor cells further to estimate the
Viewing monitor
Light
Polyp
Rectum
Colon
Colonoscope
Polyp
Light
Colonoscopy is a procedure where a long and flexible tubular instrument called a colonoscope is inserted into the patient’s
anus in order to view the lining of the colon and rectum. It is performed to test for colorectal cancer and other bowel diseases,
and enables the physician to collect tissue samples for laboratory analysis.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
944 Colonoscopy
aggressiveness of the tumor and the extent of spread of
the disease. This is crucial before deciding on the mode
of treatment for the disease. Abnormal findings could
also be due to inflammatory bowel diseases such
as ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease. A condition
called diverticulosis, where many small fingerlike
pouches protrude from the colon wall, may also con-
tribute to an abnormal result in the colonoscopy.
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘Professional Organization Recommends Standard
Colonoscopy Over Virtual.’’Biotech WeekDecember
31, 2003.
‘‘Study Shows Virtual Colonoscopy as Effective as
Traditional Colonoscopy.’’Biotech WeekDec. 31, 2003.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta,
GA 30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. <http://
www.cancer.org>.
Cancer Research Institute. 681 Fifth Ave., New York, N.Y.
10022. (800) 992-2623. <http://
www.cancerresearch.org>.
National Cancer Institute. Building 31, Room 10A31, 31
Center Drive, MSC 2580, Bethesda, MD 20892-2580.
(800) 422-6237. <http://www.nci.nih.gov>.
United Ostomy Association, Inc. (UOA). 19772 MacArthur
Blvd., Suite 200, Irvine, CA 92612-2405. (800)
826-0826. <http://www.uoa.org>.
Lata Cherath, PhD
Teresa G. Odle
Color blindness
Definition
Color blindness is an abnormal condition charac-
terized by the inability to clearly distinguish different
colors of the spectrum. The difficulties can be mild to
severe. It is a misleading term because people with
color blindness are not blind. Rather, they tend to
see colors in a limited range of hues; a rare few may
not see colors at all.
Description
Normal color vision requires the use of specialized
receptor cells called cones, which are located in the
retina of the eye. There are three types of cones,
termed red, blue, and green, which enable people to
see a wide spectrum of colors. An abnormality, or
deficiency, of any of the types of cones will result in
abnormal color vision.
There are three basic variants of color blindness.
Red/green color blindness is the most common defi-
ciency, affecting 8% of Caucasian males and 0.5% of
Caucasian females. The prevalence varies with culture.
Blue color blindness is an inability to distinguish
both blue and yellow, which are seen as white or gray.
It is quite rare and has equal prevalence in males and
females. It is common for young children to have blue/
green confusion that becomes less pronounced in
adulthood. Blue color deficiency often appears in peo-
ple who have physical disorders such asliver diseaseor
diabetes mellitus.
A total inability to distinguish colors (achroma-
topsia) is exceedingly rare. These affected individuals
view the world in shades of gray. They frequently have
poor visual acuity and are extremely sensitive to light
KEY TERMS
Barium enema— An x-ray test of the bowel after
giving the patient an enema of a white chalky sub-
stance that outlines the colon and the rectum.
Biopsy— Removal of a tissue sample for examina-
tion under the microscope to check for cancer cells.
Colonoscope— A thin, flexible, hollow, lighted
tube that in inserted through the rectum into the
colon to enable the doctor to view the entire lining
of the colon.
Crohn’s disease— A chronic inflammatory disease
where the immune system starts attacking one’s
own body. The disease generally starts in the gas-
trointestinal tract.
Diverticulosis— A condition where pouchlike sec-
tions that bulge through the large intestine’s mus-
cular walls but are not inflamed occur. They may
cause bleeding, stomach distress, and excess gas.
Pathologist— A doctor who specializes in the diag-
nosis of disease by studying cells and tissues under
a microscope.
Polyps— Abnormal growths that develop on the
inside of a hollow organ such as the colon.
Ulcerative colitis— A chronic condition where
recurrent ulcers are found in the colon. It is mani-
fested clinically by abdominal cramping, and rec-
tal bleeding.
Color blindness
(photophobia), which causes them to squint in ordin-
ary light.
Researchers studying red/green color blindness in
the United Kingdom reported an average prevalence of
only 4.7% in one group. Only 1% of Eskimo males are
color blind. Approximately 2.9% of boys from Saudi
Arabia and 3.7% from India were found to have defi-
cient color vision. Red/green color blindness may
slightly increase an affected person’s chances of con-
tracting leprosy. Pre-term infants exhibit an increased
prevalence of blue color blindness. Achromatopsia has
a prevalence of about 1 in 33,000 in the United States
and affects males and females equally.
Causes and symptoms
Red/green and blue color blindness appear to be
located on at least two different gene locations. The
majority of affected individuals are males. Females are
carriers, but are not normally affected. This indicates
that the X chromosome is one of the locations for
color blindness. Male offspring of females who carry
the altered gene have a 50-50 chance of being color-
blind. The rare female that has red/green color blind-
ness, or rarer still, blue color blindness, indicates there
is an involvement of another gene. As of 2001, the
location of this gene has not been identified.
Achromatopsia, the complete inability to distin-
guish color, is an autosomal recessive disease of the
retina. This means that both parents have one copy of
the altered gene but do not have the disease. Each of
their children has a 25% chance of not having the gene,
a 50% chance of having one altered gene (and, like the
parents, being unaffected), and a 25% risk of having
both the altered gene and the condition. In 1997, the
achromatopsia gene was located on chromosome 2.
The inability to correctly identify colors is the only
sign of color blindness. It is important to note that
people with red/green or blue varieties of color blind-
ness use other cues such as color saturation and object
shape or location to distinguish colors. They can often
distinguish red or green if they can visually compare the
colors. However, most have difficulty accurately iden-
tifying colors without any other references. Most peo-
ple with any impairment in color vision learn colors, as
do other young children. These individuals often reach
adolescence before their visual deficiency is identified.
Color blindness is sometimes acquired. Chronic
illnesses that can lead to color blindness include
Alzheimer’s disease, diabetes mellitus,glaucoma, leu-
kemia, liver disease, chronic alcoholism, macular
degeneration, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease,
sickle cell anemia, andretinitis pigmentosa. Accidents
or strokes that damage the retina or affect particular
areas of the brain eye can lead to color blindness.
Some medications such as antibiotics, barbiturates,
anti-tuberculosis drugs, high blood pressure medica-
tions, and several medications used to treat nervous
disorders and psychological problems may cause color
blindness. Industrial or environmental chemicals such
as carbon monoxide, carbon disulfide, fertilizers, styr-
ene, and some containing lead can cause loss of color
vision. Occasionally, changes can occur in the affected
person’s capacity to see colors after age 60.
Diagnosis
There are several tests available to identify pro-
blems associated with color vision. The most com-
monly used is the American Optical/Hardy, Rand,
and Ritter Pseudoisochromatic test. It is composed
of several discs filled with colored dots of different
sizes and colors. A person with normal color vision
looking at a test item sees a number that is clearly
located somewhere in the center of a circle of variously
colored dots. A color-blind person is not able to dis-
tinguish the number.
The Ishihara test is comprised of eight plates that
are similar to the American Optical Pseudoisochromatic
test plates. The individual being tested looks for num-
bers among the various colored dots on each test plate.
Some plates distinguish between red/green and blue
color blindness. Individuals with normal color vision
perceive one number. Those with red/green color defi-
ciency see a different number. Those with blue color
vision see yet a different number.
A third analytical tool is the Titmus II Vision
Tester Color Perception test. The subject looks into a
stereoscopic machine. The test stimulus most often
used in professional offices contains six different
designs or numbers on a black background, framed
in a yellow border. Titmus II can test one eye at a time.
However, its value is limited because it can only iden-
tify red/green deficiencies and is not highly accurate.
Treatment
There is no treatment or cure for color blindness.
Most color vision deficient persons compensate well
for their abnormality and usually rely on color cues
and details that are not consciously evident to persons
with typical color vision.
Inherited color blindness cannot be prevented. In
the case of some types of acquired color deficiency, if
the cause of the problem is removed, the condition may
946 Color blindness
improve with time. But for most people with acquired
color blindness, the damage is usually permanent.
Prognosis
Color blindness that is inherited is present in both
eyes and remains constant over an individual’s entire
life. Some cases of acquired color vision loss are not
severe, may appear in only one eye, and last for only a
short time. Other cases tend to be progressive, becom-
ing worse with time.
Resources
BOOKS
Wiggs, Janey L. ‘‘Color Vision.’’ InOphthalmology, edited
by Myron Yanoff and Jay S. Duker. St. Louis: Mosby,
2000.
ORGANIZATIONS
Achromatopsia Network. c/o Frances Futterman, PO Box
214, Berkeley, CA 94701-0214. <http://www.achro-
mat.org/how_to_join.html>.
American Academy of Ophthalmology. PO Box 7424, San
Francisco, CA 94120-7424. (415) 561-8500. <http://
www.eyenet.org>.
International Colour Vision Society: Forschungsstelle fuer
Experimentelle Ophthalmologie. Roentgenweg 11,
Tuebingen, D-72076. Germany <http://orlab.optom.
unsw.edu.au/ICVS>.
National Society to Prevent Blindness. 500 East Remington
Rd., Schaumburg, IL 60173. (708) 843-2020 or (800)
331-2020. <http://www.preventblindness.org>.
OTHER
‘‘Breaking the Code of Color.’’Seeing, Hearing and Smelling
the World. <http://www.hhmi.org/senses/b/
b130.htm>.
‘‘Color Blindness.’’Geocities. <http://www.geocities.com/
Heartland/8833/coloreye.html>.
‘‘Medical Encyclopedia: Colorblind.’’MEDLINEplus.
<http://medlineplus.adam.com/ency/article/
001002sym.htm>.
University of Manchester. <http://www.umist.ac.uk/
UMIST_OVS/welcome.html>.
University of Nevada–Reno. <http://www.delamare.unr.
edu/cb/>.
L. Fleming Fallon, Jr., MD, DrPH
Colorectal cancer see Colon cancer; Rectal
cancer
Colostomy
Definition
Ostomy is a surgical procedure used to create an
opening for urine and feces to be released from the
body. Colostomy refers to a surgical procedure where
a portion of the large intestine is brought through the
abdominal wall to carry stool out of the body.
Purpose
A colostomy is created as a means to treat various
disorders of the large intestine, including cancer,
obstruction, inflammatory bowel disease, ruptured
diverticulum, ischemia (compromised blood supply),
or traumatic injury. Temporary colostomies are cre-
ated to divert stool from injured or diseased portions
of the large intestine, allowing rest and healing.
Permanent colostomies are performed when the distal
bowel (bowel at the farthest distance) must be
removed or is blocked and inoperable. Although col-
orectal cancer is the most common indication for a
permanent colostomy, only about 10–15% of patients
with this diagnosis require a colostomy.
Description
Surgery will result in one of three types of
colostomies:
/C15End colostomy. The functioning end of the intestine
(the section of bowel that remains connected to the
upper gastrointestinal tract) is brought out onto the
surface of the abdomen, forming the stoma by cuffing
the intestine back on itself and suturing the end to the
skin. A stoma is an artificial opening created to the
surface of the body. The surface of the stoma is actu-
ally the lining of the intestine, usually appearing moist
and pink. The distal portion of bowel (now connected
KEY TERMS
Achromatopsia— The inability to distinguish any
colors.
Cones— Receptor cells that allow the perception of
colors.
Photophobia— An extreme sensitivity to light.
Retina— The light-sensitive layer of tissue in the
back of the eye that receives and transmits visual
signals to the brain through the optic nerve.
Rod— Photoreceptor that is highly sensitive to low
levels of light and transmits images in shades of gray.
Colostomy
only to the rectum) may be removed, or sutured closed
and left in the abdomen. An end colostomy is usually
a permanent ostomy, resulting from trauma, cancer or
another pathological condition.
/C15Double–barrel colostomy. This colostomy involves
the creation of two separate stomas on the abdominal
wall. The proximal (nearest) stoma is the functional
end that is connected to the upper gastrointestinal
tract and will drain stool. The distal stoma, connected
to the rectum and also called a mucousfistula,d r a i n s
small amounts of mucus material. This is most often a
temporary colostomy performed to rest an area of
bowel, and to be later closed.
/C15Loop colostomy. This colostomy is created by bring-
ing a loop of bowel through an incision in the
abdominal wall. The loop is held in place outside
the abdomen by a plastic rod slipped beneath it. An
incision is made in the bowel to allow the passage of
stool through the loop colostomy. The supporting
rod is removed approximately 7–10 days after sur-
gery, when healing has occurred that will prevent the
loop of bowel from retracting into the abdomen. A
loop colostomy is most often performed for creation
of a temporary stoma to divert stool away from an
area of intestine that has been blocked or ruptured.
Preparation
As with any surgical procedure, the patient will be
required to sign a consent form after the procedure is
explained thoroughly. Blood and urine studies, along
with various x rays and an electrocardiograph (EKG),
may be ordered as the doctor deems necessary. If
possible, the patient should visit an enterostomal
therapist, who will mark an appropriate place on the
abdomen for the stoma, and offer pre-operative edu-
cation on ostomy management.
In order to empty and cleanse the bowel, the
patient may be placed on a low residue diet for several
days prior to surgery. A liquid diet may be ordered for
at least the day before surgery, with nothing by mouth
after midnight. A series ofenemas and/or oral prepara-
tions (GoLytely or Colyte) may be ordered to empty the
bowel of stool. Oral anti-infectives (neomycin, erythro-
mycin, or kanamycin sulfate) may be ordered to
decrease bacteria in the intestine and help prevent
post-operative infection. A nasogastric tube is inserted
from the nose to the stomach on the day of surgery or
during surgery to remove gastric secretions and prevent
nausea and vomiting. A urinary catheter (a thin plastic
tube) may also be inserted to keep the bladder empty
during surgery, giving more space in the surgical field
and decreasing chances of accidental injury.
Aftercare
Post-operative care for the patient with a new
colostomy, as with those who have had any major
surgery, involves monitoring of blood pressure,
pulse, respirations, and temperature. Breathing tends
to be shallow because of the effect of anesthesia and
the patient’s reluctance to breathe deeply and experi-
ence pain that is caused by the abdominal incision. The
patient is instructed how to support the operative site
during deep breathing and coughing, and given pain
medication as necessary. Fluid intake and output is
measured, and the operative site is observed for color
and amount of wound drainage. The nasogastric tube
will remain in place, attached to low intermittent suc-
tion until bowel activity resumes. For the first 24–48
hours after surgery, the colostomy will drain bloody
mucus. Fluids and electrolytes are infused intrave-
nously until the patient’s diet is can gradually be
resumed, beginning with liquids. Usually within
72 hours, passage of gas and stool through the stoma
begins. Initially the stool is liquid, gradually thicken-
ing as the patient begins to take solid foods. The
patient is usually out of bed in 8–24 hours after surgery
and discharged in 2–4 days.
A colostomy pouch will generally have been
placed on the patient’s abdomen, around the stoma
during surgery. During the hospital stay, the patient
and his or her caregivers will be educated on how to
care for the colostomy. Determination of appropriate
pouching supplies and a schedule of how often to
change the pouch should be established. Regular
assessment and meticulous care of the skin surround-
ing the stoma is important to maintain an adequate
surface on which to apply the pouch. Some patients
with colostomies are able to routinely irrigate the
stoma, resulting in regulation of bowel function;
rather than needing to wear a pouch, these patients
may need only a dressing or cap over their stoma.
Often, an enterostomal therapist will visit the patient
at home after discharge to help with the patient’s
resumption of normal daily activities.
Risks
Potential complications of colostomy surgery
include:
/C15excessive bleeding
/C15surgical wound infection
/C15thrombophlebitis (inflammation and blood clot to
veins in the legs)
/C15pneumonia
948 Colostomy
/C15pulmonary embolism (blood clot or air bubble in the
lungs’ blood supply)
Normal results
Complete healing is expected without complica-
tions. The period of time required for recovery from
the surgery may vary depending of the patient’s over-
all health prior to surgery. The colostomy patient
without other medical complications should be able
to resume all daily activities once recovered from the
surgery.
Abnormal results
The doctor should be made aware of any of the
following problems after surgery:
/C15increased pain, swelling, redness, drainage, or bleed-
ing in the surgical area.
/C15headache, muscle aches,dizziness,o rfever.
/C15increased abdominal pain or swelling,constipation,
nausea or vomiting or black, tarry stools
Stomal complications to be monitored include:
/C15Death (necrosis) of stomal tissue. Caused by inade-
quate blood supply, this complication is usually visi-
ble 12–24 hours after the operation and may require
additional surgery.
/C15Retraction (stoma is flush with the abdomen surface
or has moved below it). Caused by insufficient sto-
mal length, this complication may be managed by use
of special pouching supplies. Elective revision of the
stoma is also an option.
Closed incision
Catheter
Colostomy bag
Colon
Glass rod
A colostomy is a surgical procedure in which a portion of the large intestine, or colon, is brought through the abdominal wall to
carry feces out of the body. There are three types of colostomies: end colostomy, double-barrel colostomy, and loop colostomy.
The loop colostomy is featured in the illustration above.(Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Colostomy
/C15Prolapse (stoma increases length above the surface of
the abdomen). Most often results from an overly large
opening in the abdominal wall or inadequate fixation
of the bowel to the abdominal wall. Surgical correc-
tion is required when blood supply is compromised.
/C15Stenosis (narrowing at the opening of the stoma).
Often associated with infection around the stoma
or scarring. Mild stenosis can be removed under
local anesthesia. Severe stenosis may require surgery
for reshaping the stoma.
/C15Parastomal hernia (bowel causing bulge in the
abdominal wall next to the stoma). This is due to
placement of the stoma where the abdominal wall is
weak or creation of an overly large opening in the
abdominal wall. The use of an ostomy support belt
and special pouching supplies may be adequate. If
severe, the defect in the abdominal wall should be
repaired and the stoma moved to another location.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
United Ostomy Association, Inc. (UOA). 19772
MacArthur Blvd., Suite 200, Irvine, CA 92612-2405.
(800) 826-0826. <http://www.uoa.org>.
Kathleen D. Wright, RN
Colposcopy
Definition
Colposcopy is a procedure that allows a physician
to take a closer look at a woman’s cervix and vagina
using a special instrument called a colposcope. It is
used to check for precancerous or abnormal areas.
The colposcope can magnify the area between 10 and
40 times; some devices also can take photographs.
Purpose
The colposcope helps to identify abnormal areas
of the cervix or vagina so that small pieces of tissue
(biopsies) can be taken for further analysis.
Colposcopy is used to identify or rule out the exis-
tence of any precancerous conditions in the cervical
tissue. If aPap testshows abnormal cell growth, further
testing, such as colposcopy, often is required. A Pap test
is a screening test that involves scraping cells from the
outside of the cervix. If abnormal cells are found, the
physician will attempt to find the area that produced
the abnormal cells and remove it for further study
(biopsy). Only then can a diagnosis be made.
Colposcopy may also be performed if the cervix
looks abnormal during a routine examination. It may
also be suggested for women withgenital wartsand for
diethylstilbestrol (DES) daughters (women whose
mothers took DES when pregnant with them).
Precautions
Women who are pregnant, or who suspect that
they are pregnant, must tell their doctor before the
procedure begins. Pregnant women can, and should,
have a colposcopy if they have an abnormal Pap test.
However, special precautions must be taken during
biopsy of the cervix.
Description
A colposcopy is performed in a physician’s office
and is similar to a regular gynecologic exam. An
instrument called a speculum is used to hold the
vagina open, and the gynecologist looks at the cervix
and vagina through the colposcope instead simply by
eye, as in a routine examination.
The colposcope is placed outside the patient’s body
and never touches the skin. The cervix and vagina are
swabbed with dilute acetic acid (vinegar). The solution
highlights abnormal areas by turning them white
(instead of a normal pink color). Abnormal areas can
KEY TERMS
Diverticulum— Pouches that project off the wall of
the intestine, visible as opaque on an x ray after the
patient has swallowed a contrast (dye) substance.
Embolism— Blockage of a blood vessel by any small
piece of material traveling in the blood. The emboli
may be caused by germs, air, blood clots, or fat.
Enema— Insertion of a tube into the rectum to
infuse fluid into the bowel and encourage a bowel
movement. Ordinary enemas contain tap water,
mixtures of soap and water, glycerine and water,
or other materials.
Intestine— Commonly called the bowels, divided
into the small and large intestine. They extend from
the stomach to the anus. The small intestine is
about 20 ft (6 m) long. The large intestine is about
5 ft (1.5 m) long.
Ischemia— A compromise in blood supply delivered
to body tissues that causes tissue damage or death.
Ostomy— A surgically created opening in the abdo-
men for elimination of waste products (urine or stool).
950 Colposcopy
also be identified by looking for a characteristic pattern
made by abnormal blood vessels. In 2004, a study
showed that a new optical detection system used with
colposcopy greatly improved visual detection of pre-
cancerous changes in the cervix during the procedure.
If any abnormal areas are seen, the doctor will
take a biopsy of the tissue, a common procedure that
takes about 15 minutes. Several samples might be
taken, depending on the size of the abnormal area.
A biopsy may cause temporary discomfort and cramp-
ing, which usually go away within a few minutes. If the
abnormal area appears to extend inside the cervical
canal, a scraping of the canal may be done. The biopsy
results are usually available within a week.
If the tissue sample indicates abnormal growth
(dysplasia) or precancer, and if the entire abnormal
area can be seen, the doctor can destroy the tissue
using one of several procedures, including ones that
use high heat (diathermy), extreme cold (cryotherapy),
or lasers. Another procedure, called a loop electrosur-
gical excision (LEEP), uses low-voltage high-frequency
radio waves to excise tissue. If any of the abnormal
tissue is within the cervical canal, a cone biopsy
(removal of a conical section of the cervix for inspec-
tion) will be needed.
Preparation
Colposcopy is a painless procedure that does not
require any anesthetic medication. If a biopsy is done,
there may be mild cramps or a sharp pinching when the
tissue is removed. To lessen thispain,y o u rd o c t o rm a y
recommend 800 mg of ibuprofen (Motrin) taken the
night before and the morning of the procedure (no later
than 30 minutes before the appointment). Patients who
are pregnant or allergic toaspirin or ibuprofen can take
two tablets ofacetaminophen (Tylenol) instead.
Aftercare
If a biopsy was done, there may be a dark vaginal
discharge afterwards. After the sample is removed, the
doctor applies Monsel’s solution to the area to stop
the bleeding. When this mixes with blood it creates a
black fluid that looks like coffee grounds for a couple
of days after the procedure. It is also normal to have
some spotting after a colposcopy.
Patients should not use tampons or put anything
else in the vagina for at least a week after the proce-
dure, or until the doctor says it is safe. In addition,
women should not have sex or douche for at least a
week after the procedure because of the risk of
infection.
Risks
Occasionally, patients may have bleeding or infec-
tion after biopsy. Bleeding is usually controlled with a
topical medication.
A patient should call her doctor right away if she
notices any of the following symptoms:
/C15heavy vaginal bleeding (more than one sanitary pad
an hour)
/C15fever, chills, or an unpleasant vaginal odor
/C15lower abdominal pain
Normal results
If visual inspection shows that the surface of the
cervix is smooth and pink, this is considered normal. If
A colposcopy makes it possible for a physician to view this
healthy cervix without surgery. (Photograph by Dr. P. Marazzi,
Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
This colposcopic view of the cervix reveals CIN 2 dysplasia,
or abnormal growth of cells. This is the second stage in the
development of cervical cancer.(Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
Colposcopy
abnormal areas are found and biopsied and the results
show no indication ofcancer, a precancerous condi-
tion, or other disease, this also is considered normal.
Abnormal results
Abnormal conditions that can be detected using
colposcopy and biopsy include precancerous tissue
changes (cervical dysplasia), cancer, and cervical
warts (human papilloma virus).
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘Optical Detection System With Colposcopy Improves
Cervical Cancer Detection.’’Cancer WeeklyMarch 9,
2004: 51.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology.
20 W. Washington St., Ste. #1, Hagerstown, MD
21740. (800) 787-7227. <http://www.asccp.org>.
Carol A. Turkington
Teresa G. Odle
Coma
Definition
Coma, from the Greek word ‘‘koma,’’ meaning
deep sleep, is a state of extreme unresponsiveness, in
which an individual exhibits no voluntary movement
or behavior. Furthermore, in a deep coma, even pain-
ful stimuli (actions which, when performed on a
healthy individual, result in reactions) are unable to
affect any response, and normal reflexes may be lost.
Description
Coma lies on a spectrum with other alterations in
consciousness. The level of consciousness required by,
for example, someone reading this passage lies at one
extreme end of the spectrum, while complete brain
death lies at the other end of the spectrum. In between
are such states as obtundation, drowsiness, and stu-
por. All of these are conditions which, unlike coma,
still allow the individual to respond to stimuli,
although such a response may be brief and require
stimulus of greater than normal intensity.
In order to understand the loss of function suf-
fered by a comatose individual, it is necessary to first
understand the important characteristics of the con-
scious state. Consciousness is defined by two funda-
mental elements: awareness and arousal.
Awareness allows one to receive and process all
the information communicated by the five senses, and
thus relate to oneself and to the outside world.
Awareness has both psychological and physiological
components. The psychological component is gov-
erned by an individual’s mind and mental processes.
The physiological component refers to the functioning
of an individual’s brain, and therefore that brain’s
KEY TERMS
Biopsy— Removal of sample of abnormal tissue for
more extensive examination under a microscope.
Cervix— The neck of the uterus.
Cryotherapy— Freezing and destroying abnormal
cells.
DES— The abbreviation for diethylstilbestrol, a syn-
thetic form of estrogen that was widely prescribed to
women from 1940 to 1970 to prevent complications.
It was linked to several serious birth defects and
disorders of the reproductive system in daughters of
women who took DES. In 1971, the FDA suggested it
not be used during pregnancy and banned its use in
1979 as a growth promoter in livestock.
Diathermy— Also called electrocautery, this is a
procedure that heats and destroys abnormal cells.
It is gradually being replaced by cryosurgery,
lasers, or LEEP.
Human papilloma virus— A virus that causes com-
mon warts of the hands and feet, as well as lesions
in the genital and vaginal area. More than 50 types
of HPV have been identified, some of which are
linked to cancerous and precancerous conditions,
including cancer of the cervix.
Loop electrosurgical excision (LEEP)— A proce-
dure that can help diagnose and treat cervical
abnormalities, using a thin wire loop that emits a
low-voltage high-frequency radio wave that can
excise tissue. It is considered better than either
lasers or electrocautery because it can both diag-
nose and treat precancerous cells or early stage
cancer at the same time.
Pap test— The common term for the Papanicolaou
test, a simple smear method of examining stained
cells to detect cancer of the cervix.
Speculum— A retractor used to separate the walls
of the vagina to make visual examination easier.
952 Coma