DISEASE: Dengue Fever
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Garcia Julve G., and G. Martinez Villen. ‘‘The Multiple
Monoblock Toe-to-Hand Transfer in Digital
Reconstruction. A Report of Ten Cases.’’Journal of
Hand Surgery29 (June 2004): 222–229.
ORGANIZATIONS
International Child Amputee Network. <http://www.amp-
info.net/childamp.htm>.
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275
Mamaroneck Ave., White Plains, NY 10605. (914) 428-
7100. resourcecenter@modimes.org. <http://
www.modimes.org>.
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). 55
Kenosia Avenue, P. O. Box 1968, Danbury, CT 06813-
1968. (203) 744-0100 or (800) 999-6673. Fax: (203) 798-
2291. <http://www.rarediseases.org>.
Jeffrey P. Larson, RPT
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Congenital bladder anomalies
Definition
The two most common congenital bladder
abnormalities are exstrophy and congenital diverti-
cula. An exstrophic bladder is one that is open to the
outside and turned inside-out, so that its inside is
visible at birth, protruding from the lower abdomen.
A diverticulum is an extension of a hollow organ,
usually shaped like a pouch with a narrow opening.
Description
During fetal development, folds enclose tissues
and organs and eventually fuse at the edges to form
sealed compartments. Both in the front and the back,
folds eventually become major body structures. In the
back, the entire spinal column folds in like a pipe
wrapped in a pillow. In the front, the entire lower
urinary system is folded in.
/C15Exstrophy of the bladder represents a failure of this
folding process to complete itself, so the organs form
with more or less of their front side missing and open
to the outside. At the same time, the front of the
pelvic bone is widely separated. The abdominal wall
is open, too. In fact, the defect often extends all the
way to the penis in the male or splits the clitoris in the
female.
/C15A congenital bladder diverticulum represents an area
of weakness in the bladder wall through which
extrudes some of the lining of the bladder. (A small
balloon squeezed in a fist will create a diverticula-like
effect between the fingers.) Bladder diverticula may
be multiple, and they often occur at the ureterovesi-
cal junction–the entrance of the upper urinary system
into the bladder. In this location, they may cause
urine to reflux into the ureter and kidney, leading
to infection and possible kidney damage.
Causes and symptoms
As with manybirth defects, the causes are not well
known. Lack of prenatal care andnutrition has been
linked to many birth defects, however beyond the
avoidance of known teratogens (anything that can
cause a birth defect), there is little prevention possible.
Exstrophy is rare, occurring in about one in 40,000
births. Diverticula are more common, but less serious.
If left untreated, the patient with bladder exstro-
phy will have no control over urination and is more
likely to developbladder cancer. Diverticula, particu-
larly if it causes urine reflux, may lead to chronic
infection and its subsequent consequences.
Diagnosis
A major consideration with congenital abnormal-
ities is that they tend to be multiple. Further, each one
is unique in its extent and severity. Exstrophy can
involve the rectum and large bowel and coexist with
hernias. The obvious bladder exstrophy seen at birth
will prompt immediate action and a search for other
anomalies.
Diverticula are not visible and will be detected
only if they cause trouble. They are usually found in
an examination for the cause of recurring urinary
infections. X rays of the urinary system or acystoscopy
(examination with a telescope-like instrument) will
identify them. Often, the two procedures are done
together: a urologist will perform the cystoscopy,
then a radiologist will instill a contrast agent into the
bladder and take x rays.
Treatment
Surgery is necessary and can usually produce suc-
cessful results. If possible, the surgery must be done
within 48 hours of birth. Prior to surgery, the exposed
organs must be protected and all related defects iden-
tified and managed. Delay in the surgery leads to the
frequent need to divert the urine into the bowel
because the partially repaired bladder cannot control
the flow. After surgery, the likelihood of infection
requires monitoring.
Congenital bladder anomalies
Alternative treatment
After surgery, ongoing precautions to reduce fre-
quency of infection may need to be used. Cranberry
juice has the ability to keep bacteria from adhering to
the membranes and can help prevent infection whenever
there is increased risk. There are botanical and homeo-
pathic treatments available;however, consultation by a
t r a i n e dp r a c t i t i o n e ri sr e commended before treatment.
Prognosis
With immediate surgery, three-quarters of
patients can be successfully repaired. They will have
control of their urine and no long-term consequences.
The rate of infection is greater for those with congeni-
tal bladder anomalies, since any abnormality in the
urinary system predisposes it to invasion by bacteria.
Prevention
Birth defects often have no precisely identified
cause, therefore, prevention is limited to general mea-
sures such as early and continuous prenatal care,
appropriate nutrition, and a healthy lifestyle.
Resources
BOOKS
Gearhart, John P., and Robert D. Jeffs. ‘‘Exstrophy-
epispadias Complex and Bladder Anomalies.’’ In
Campbell’s Urology, edited by Patrick C. Walsh, et al.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
Congenital bladder diverticulum see
Congenital bladder anomalies
Congenital brain defects
Definition
Congenital brain defects are a group of disorders
of brain development.
Description
Brain development begins shortly after concep-
tion and continues throughout the growth of a fetus.
A complex genetic programcoordinates the forma-
tion, growth, and migrationof billions of neurons, or
nerve cells, and their development into discrete, inter-
acting brain regions. Interruption of this program,
especially early in development, can cause structural
defects in the brain. In addition, normal brain forma-
tion requires proper development of the surrounding
skull, and skull defects may lead to brain malforma-
tion. Congenital brain defects may be caused by
inherited genetic defect s, spontaneous mutations
within the genes of the embryo, or effects on the
embryo due to the mother’s infection, trauma, or
drug use.
Early on in development, a flat strip of tissue
along the back of the fetus rolls up to form a tube.
This so-called ‘‘neural tube’’ develops into the spinal
cord, and at one end, the brain. Closure of the tube is
required for subsequent development of the tissue
within. Anencephaly (literally ‘‘without brain’’),
results when the topmost portion of the tube fails to
close. Anencephaly is the most common severe mal-
formation seen in stillborn births. It is about four
times more common in females than males.
Anencephaly is sometimes seen to run in families,
and for parents who have conceived one anencephalic
fetus, the risk of a second is as high as 5%. Fewer than
half of babies with anencephaly are born alive, and
survival beyond the first month is rare.
Encephalocele is a protrusion of part of the brain
through a defect in the skull. The most common site
for encephalocele is along the front-to-back midline of
the skull, usually at the rear, although frontal
KEY TERMS
Congenital— Present at birth.
Cystoscopy— Examination of the urinary bladder
with a thin telescope-like instrument.
Exstrophy— Being turned inside out combined with
being outside the body.
Diverticulum— A pouch extending from a hollow
organ.
Radiologist— A physician who specializes in creat-
ing images of the internal organs of the body.
Teratogen— Any agent that can cause birth defects.
Ureter— The tube that transports urine from the
kidney to the bladder.
Ureterovesical junction— The joining of the ureter
to the bladder.
Urologist— A surgeon who specializes in diseases
of the urinary system.
976 Congenital brain defects
encephaloceles are more common among Asians.
Pressure within the skull pushes out cranial tissue.
The protective layer over the brain, the meninges,
grows to cover the protrusion, as does skin in some
cases. Defects in skull closure are thought to cause
some cases of encephalocele, while defects in neural
tube closure may cause others. Encephaloceles may be
small and contain little or no brain tissue, or may be
quite large and contain a significant fraction of the
brain.
Failure of neural-tube closure below the level of
the brain prevents full development of the surrounding
vertebral bones and leads tospina bifida, or a divided
spinal column. Incomplete closure causes protrusion
of the spinal cord and meninges, called meningomye-
locele. Some cases of spina bifida are accompanied by
another defect at the base of the brain, known as the
Arnold-Chiari malformation or Chiari II malforma-
tion. For reasons that are unclear, part of the cerebel-
lum is displaced downward into the spinal column.
Symptoms may be present at birth or delayed until
early childhood.
The Dandy-Walker malformation is marked by
incomplete formation, or absence of, the central sec-
tion of the cerebellum, and the growth of cysts within
the lowest of the brain’s ventricles. The ventricles are
fluid-filled cavities within the brain, through which
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) normally circulates. The
cysts may block the exit of the fluid, causinghydro-
cephalus. Symptoms may be present at birth or
delayed until early childhood.
Soon after closure of the neural tube, the brain
divides into two halves, or hemispheres. Failure of
division is termed holoprosencephaly (literally
‘‘whole forebrain’’). Holoprosencephaly is almost
always accompanied by facial and cranial deformities
along the midline, includingcleft lip, cleft palate, fused
eye sockets and a single eye (cyclopia), and deformities
of the limbs, heart, gastrointestinal tract, and other
internal organs. Most infants are either stillborn or die
soon after birth. Survivors suffer from severe neuro-
logical impairments.
The normal ridges and valleys of the mature brain
are formed after cells from the inside of the developing
brain migrate to the outside and multiply. When these
cells fail to migrate, the surface remains smooth, a
condition called lissencephaly (‘‘smooth brain’’).
Lissencephaly is often associated with facial abnorm-
alities including a small jaw, a high forehead, a short
nose, and low-set ears.
If damaged during growth, especially within the
first 20 weeks, brain tissue may stop growing, while
tissue around it continues to form. This causes an
abnormal cleft or groove to appear on the surface of
the brain, called schizen cephaly (literally ‘‘split
brain’’). This cleft should not be confused with the
normal wrinkled brain surface, nor should the name
be mistaken for schizophrenia , a mental disorder.
Generalized destruction of tissue or lack of brain
development may lead to hydranencephaly, in
which cerebrospinal fluid fills much of the space
normally occupied by the brain. Hydranencephaly
is distinct from hydrocephalus, in which CSF
accumulates within a normally-formed brain, put-
ting pressure on it and possibly causing skull
expansion.
Excessive brain size is termed megalencephaly
(literally ‘‘big brain’’). Megalencephaly is defined as
any brain size above the 98th percentile within the
population. Some cases are familial, and may be
entirely benign. Others are due to metabolic or neu-
rologic disease. The opposite condition, microce-
phaly, may be caused by failure of the brain to
develop, or by intrauterine infection, drug toxicity,
or brain trauma.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
Congenital brain defects may have genetic, infec-
tious, toxic, or traumatic causes. In most cases, no
certain cause can be identified.
GENETIC CAUSES. Some brain defects are caused
by trisomy, the inclusion of a third copy of a chromo-
some normally occurring in pairs. Most trisomies
occur because of improper division of the chromo-
somes during formation of eggs or sperm. Trisomy of
chromosome 9 can cause some cases of Dandy-Walker
and Chiari II malformation. Some cases of holopro-
sencephaly are caused by trisomy of chromosome 13,
while others are due to abnormalities in chromosomes
7 or 18. Individual gene defects, either inherited or
spontaneous, are responsible for other cases of con-
genital brain malformations.
DRUGS. Drugs known to cause congenital brain
defects when used by the mother during critical devel-
opmental periods include:
/C15anticonvulsant drugs
/C15retinoic acid and tretinoin
/C15warfarin
/C15alcohol
/C15cocaine
Congenital brain defects
OTHER. Other causes of congenital brain defects
include:
/C15intrauterine infections, including cytomegalovirus,
rubella, herpes simplex, and varicella zoster
/C15maternal diabetes mellitus
/C15maternal phenylketonuria
/C15fetal trauma
Symptoms
Besides the features listed above, symptoms of
congenital brain defects may include:
/C15Chiari II malformation: impaired swallowing and
gag reflex, loss of the breathing reflex, facialparaly-
sis, uncontrolled eye movements ( nystagmus),
impaired balance and gait.
/C15Dandy-Walker malformation: symptoms of hydro-
cephalus, lack of muscle tone or ‘‘floppiness,’’ sei-
zures, spasticity, deafness, irritability, visual
impairment, deterioration of consciousness,
paralysis.
/C15Lissencephaly: lack of muscle tone, seizures, devel-
opmental delay, spasticity,cerebral palsy.
/C15Hydranencephaly: irritability, spasticity, seizures,
temperature oscillations.
/C15Megalencephaly due to neurological or metabolic
disease: mental retardation, seizures.
Diagnosis
Congenital brain defects are diagnosed either from
directphysical examinationor imaging studies including
computed tomography scans(CT) and magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI). Electroencephalography (EEG)
may be used to reveal characteristic abnormalities.
Prenatal diagnosis of neural tube defects causing
anencephaly or meningomyelocele is possible through
ultrasound examination and maternal blood testing
for alpha-fetoprotein, which is almost always elevated.
Ultrasound can also be used to diagnose Dandy-
Walker and Chiari II malformations.Amniocentesis
may reveal trisomies or other chromosomal
abnormalities.
Treatment
Meningomyelocele may be treated with surgery to
close the open portion of the spinal cord. Surgery for
encephalocele is possible only if there is a minimal
amount of brain tissue protruding. Malformations
associated with hydrocephalus (Dandy-Walker,
Chiari II, and some cases of hydranencephaly) may
be treated by installation of a drainage shunt for cere-
brospinal fluid. Drugs may be used to treat some
symptoms of brain defects, including seizures and
spasticity.
Prognosis
Most congenital brain defects carry a very poor
prognosis. Surgical treatment of meningomyelocele
and encephalocele may be successful, with lasting neu-
rological deficiencies, that vary in severity. Early treat-
ment of hydrocephalus may prevent more severe brain
damage.
Prevention
Some cases of congenital brain defects can be
prevented with good maternal nutrition, including
folic acid supplements. Folic acid is a vitamin that
has been shown to reduce the incidence of neural
tube defects. Pregnant women should avoid exposure
to infection, especially during the first trimester.
Abstention from drugs and alcohol duringpregnancy
may reduce risk.Genetic counseling is advisable for
parents who have had one child with anencephaly,
since the likelihood of having another is increased.
Resources
BOOKS
Fenichel, G. M.Clinical Pediatric Neurology.3rd ed.
W. B. Saunders Co., 1997.
Richard Robinson
Congenital defects see Birth defects
KEY TERMS
Amniocentesis— Removal of fluid from the sac sur-
rounding a fetus for purposes of diagnosis.
Cerebrospinal fluid— Fluid produced within the
brain for nutrient transport and structural purposes.
CSF circulates through the ventricles, open spaces
within the brain, and drains through the mem-
branes surrounding the brain.
Congenital— Defect present at birth.
Fetus— The unborn human, developing in a
woman’s uterus, from the eighth week after fertili-
zation to birth.
978 Congenital brain defects
Congenital heart disease
Definition
Congenital heart disease, also called congenital
heart defect, includes a variety of malformations of the
heart or its major blood vessels that are present at birth.
Description
Congenital heart disease occurs when the heart or
blood vessels near the heart do not develop properly
before birth. Some infants are born with mild types of
congenital heart disease, but most need surgery in
order to survive. Patients who have had surgery are
likely to experience other cardiac problems later in life.
Most types of congenital heart disease obstruct the
flow of blood in the heart or the nearby vessels, or cause
an abnormal flow of blood through the heart. Rarer
types of congenital heart disease occur when the new-
born has only one ventricle, or when the pulmonary
artery and the aorta come out of the same ventricle, or
when one side of the heart is not completely formed.
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent ductus arteriosusrefers to the opening of a
passageway—or temporary blood vessel (ductus)—to
carry the blood from the heart to the aorta before
birth, allowing blood to bypass the lungs, which are
not yet functional. The ductus should close sponta-
neously in the first few hours or days after birth. When
it does not close in the newborn, some of the blood
that should flow through the aorta then returns to the
lungs. Patent ductus arteriosus is common in prema-
ture babies, but rare in full-term babies. It also has
been associated with mothers who had German
measles (rubella) while pregnant.
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome, a condition in
which the left side of the heart is underdeveloped, is
rare, but it is the most serious type of congenital heart
disease. With this syndrome, blood reaches the aorta,
which pumps blood to the entire body, only from the
ductus, which then normally closes within a few days
of birth. In hypoplastic left heart syndrome, the baby
seems normal at birth, but as the ductus closes, blood
cannot reach the aorta and circulation fails.
Obstruction defects
When heart valves, arteries, or veins are nar-
rowed, they partly or completely block the flow of
blood. The most common obstruction defects arepul-
monary valve stenosis, aortic valve stenosis, andcoarc-
tation of the aorta. Bicuspid aortic valve and subaortic
stenosis are less common.
Stenosis is a narrowing of the valves or arteries. In
pulmonary stenosis, the pulmonary valve does not
open properly, forcing the right ventricle to work
harder. In aortic stenosis, the improperly formed aor-
tic valve is narrowed. As the left ventricle works
harder to pump blood through the body, it becomes
enlarged. In coarctation of the aorta, the aorta is con-
stricted, reducing the flow of blood to the lower part of
the body and increasing blood pressure in the upper
body.
A bicuspid aortic valve has only two flaps instead
of three, which can lead to stenosis in adulthood.
Subaortic stenosis is a narrowing of the left ventricle
below the aortic valve that limits the flow of blood
from the left ventricle.
Septal defects
When a baby is born with a hole in the septum (the
wall separating the right and left sides of the heart),
blood leaks from the left side of the heart to the right,
or from a higher pressure zone to a lower pressure
zone. A major leakage can lead to enlargement of the
heart and failing circulation. The most common types
of septal defects areatrial septal defect, an opening
between the two upper heart chambers, andventricular
septal defect, an opening between the two lower heart
chambers. Ventricular septal defect accounts for
about 15% of all cases of congenital heart disease in
the United States.
Cyanotic defects
Heart disorders that cause a decreased, inade-
quate amount of oxygen in blood pumped to the
body are called cyanotic defects. Cyanotic defects,
including truncus arteriosus, total anomalous pul-
monary venous return,tetralogy of Fallot, transposi-
tion of the great arteries, and tricuspid atresia, result in
a blue discoloration of the skin due to low oxygen
levels. About 10% of cases of congenital heart disease
in the United States are tetralogy of Fallot, which
includes four defects. The major defects are a large
hole between the ventricles, which allows oxygen-poor
blood to mix with oxygen-rich blood, and narrowing
at or beneath the pulmonary valve. The other defects
are an overly muscular right ventricle and an aorta
that lies over the ventricular hole.
In transposition (reversal of position) of the great
arteries, the pulmonary artery and the aorta are
Congenital heart disease
reversed, causing oxygen-rich blood to re-circulate to
the lungs while oxygen-poor blood goes to the rest of
the body. In tricuspid atresia, the baby lacks a triscu-
pid valve and blood cannot flow properly from the
right atrium to the right ventricle.
Other defects
Ebstein’s anomaly is a rare congenital syndrome
that causes malformed tricuspid valve leaflets, which
allow blood to leak between the right ventricle and the
right atrium. It also may cause a hole in the wall
between the left and right atrium. Treatment often
involves repairing the tricuspid valve. Ebstein’s anom-
aly may be associated with maternal use of the psy-
chiatric drug lithium duringpregnancy.
Brugada syndrome is another rare congenital
heart defect that appears in adulthood and may
cause sudden death if untreated. Symptoms, which
include rapid, uneven heart beat, often appear at
night. Scientists believe that Brugada syndrome is
caused by mutations in the gene SCN5A, which
involves cardiac sodium channels.
Infants born with DiGeorge sequence can have
heart defects such as a malformed aortic arch and
tetralogy of Fallot. Researchers believe DiGeorge
sequence most often is caused by mutations in genes
in the region 22q11.
Marfan syndrome is a connective tissue disorder
that causes tears in the aorta. Since the disease also
causes excessive bone growth, most Marfan syndrome
patients are over six feet tall. In athletes, and others, it
can lead to sudden death. Researchers believe the
defect responsible for Marfan’s syndrome is found in
gene FBN1, on chromosome 15.
About 32,000 infants are born every year with
congenital heart disease, which is the most common
birth defect. About half of these cases require medical
treatment. More than one million people with heart
defects are currently living in the United States.
Causes and symptoms
In most cases, the causes of congenital heart dis-
ease are unknown. Genetic and environmental factors
and lifestyle habits can all be involved. The likelihood
of having a child with a congenital heart disease
increases if the mother or father, another child, or
another relative had congenital heart disease or a
family history of sudden death. In 2004, researchers
identified a chromosome deletion that might explain
some of the genetic causes of certain congenital heart
diseases.
Viral infections, such as German measles, can
produce congenital heart disease. Women with dia-
betes andphenylketonuria (an inherited liver condition
also called PKU) also are at higher risk of having
children with congenital heart defects. Many cases of
congenital heart disease result from the mother’s
excessive use of alcohol or taking illegal drugs, such
as cocaine, while pregnant. The mother’s exposure to
certain anticonvulsant and dermatologic drugs during
pregnancy also can cause congenital heart disease.
There are many genetic conditions, such as Down
syndrome, which affect multiple organs and can
cause congenital heart disease.
Symptoms of congenital heart disease in general
include: shortness of breath , difficulty feeding in
infancy, sweating, cyanosis (bluish discoloration of
the skin), heart murmur, respiratory infections that
recur excessively, stunted growth, and limbs and mus-
cles that are underdeveloped.
Symptoms of specific types of congenital heart
disease are as follows:
/C15Patent ductus arteriosus: quick tiring, slow growth,
susceptibility to pneumonia, rapid breathing. If the
ductus is small, there are no symptoms.
/C15Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: ashen color, rapid
and difficult breathing, inability to eat.
/C15Obstruction defects: cyanosis (skin that is discolored
blue), chest pain, tiring easily,dizziness or fainting,
congestive heart failure, and high blood pressure.
/C15Septal defects: difficulty breathing, stunted growth.
Sometimes there are no symptoms.
/C15Cyanotic defects: cyanosis, sudden rapid breathing
or unconsciousness, and shortness of breath and
fainting duringexercise.
Diagnosis
Echocardiography and cardiacmagnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) are used to confirm congenital heart
disease when it is suggested by the symptoms and
physical examination. An echocardiograph will display
an image of the heart that is formed by sound waves. It
detects valve and other heart problems. Fetal echocar-
diography is used to diagnose congenital heart disease
in utero, usually after 20 weeks of pregnancy. Between
10 and 14 weeks of pregnancy, physicians also may use
an ultrasound to look for a thickness at the nuchal
translucency, a pocket of fluid in back of the embryo’s
neck, which may indicate a cardiac defect in 55% of
cases. Cardiac MRI, a scanning method that uses
magnetic fields and radio waves, can help physicians
980 Congenital heart disease
evaluate congenital heart disease, but is not always
necessary. Physicians also may use achest x rayto
look at the size and location of the heart and lungs, or
an electrocardiograph (ECG), which measures electri-
cal impulses to create a graph of the heart beat.
In children and adults, computed tomography
(CT) and MRI are the preferred methods to visualize
congenital heart disease. Contrast may be added to
enhance the image for the radiologist.
Treatment
Congenital heart disease is treated with drugs and/
or surgery. Drugs used includediuretics, which aid the
baby in excreting water and salts, and digoxin, which
strengthens the contraction of the heart, slows the
heartbeat, and removes fluid from tissues.
Surgical procedures seek to repair the defect as
much as possible and restore circulation to as close to
normal as possible. Sometimes, multiple surgical pro-
cedures are necessary. Surgical procedures include:
arterial switch, balloon atrial septostomy,balloon val-
vuloplasty, Damus-Kaye-Stansel procedure, Fontan
procedure, pulmonary artery banding, Ross proce-
dure, shunt procedure, and venous switch or intra-
atrial baffle.
Arterial switch, to correct transposition of the
great arteries, involves connecting the aorta to the
left ventricle and connecting the pulmonary artery to
the right ventricle. Balloon atrial septostomy, also
done to correct transposition of the great arteries,
enlarges the atrial opening during heart catheteriza-
tion. Balloon valvuloplasty uses a balloon-tipped
catheter to open a narrowed heart valve, improving
the flow of blood in pulmonary stenosis. It is some-
times used in aortic stenosis. Transposition of the
great arteries also can be corrected by the Damus-
Kaye-Stansel procedure, in which the pulmonary
artery is cut in two and connected to the ascending
aorta and the farthest section of the right ventricle.
For tricuspid atresia and pulmonary atresia, the
Fontan procedure connects the right atrium to the
pulmonary artery directly or with a conduit, and
the atrial defect is closed. Pulmonary artery banding,
narrowing the pulmonary artery with a band to reduce
blood flow and pressure in the lungs, is used for ven-
tricular septal defect, atrioventricular canal defect,
and tricuspid atresia. Later, the band can be removed
and the defect corrected with open-heart surgery.
To correct aortic stenosis, the Ross procedure
grafts the pulmonary artery to the aorta. For tetralogy
of Fallot, tricuspid atresia, or pulmonary atresia, the
shunt procedure creates a passage between blood ves-
sels, sending blood into parts of the body that need it.
For transposition of the great arteries, venous switch
creates a tunnel inside the atria to re-direct oxygen-
rich blood to the right ventricle and aorta and venous
blood to the left ventricle and pulmonary artery.
When all other options fail, some patients may
need a heart transplant. Children with congenital
heart disease require lifelong monitoring, even after
successful surgery. The American Heart Association
recommends regular dental check-ups and the preven-
tive use ofantibiotics to protect patients from heart
infections, or endocarditis. However, a 2003 study
reported that preventive antibiotics are underused in
people with congenital heart disease. Many patients
did not understand the risk of endocarditis. Since
KEY TERMS
Aorta— The main artery located above the heart
that pumps oxygenated blood out into the body.
Many congenital heart defects affect the aorta.
Congenital— Refers to a disorder that is present at
birth.
Cyanotic— Marked by bluish discoloration of the
skin due to a lack of oxygen in the blood. It is one of
the types of congenital heart disease.
Ductus— The blood vessel that joins the pulmonary
artery and the aorta. When the ductus does not
close at birth, it causes a type of congenital heart
disease called patent ductus arteriosus.
Electrocardiograph (ECG, EKG)— A test used to
measure electrical impulses coming from the
heart in order to gain information about its structure
or function.
Hypoplastic— Incomplete or underdevelopment
of a tissue or organ. Hypoplastic left heart syn-
drome is the most serious type of congenital heart
disease.
Neuchal translucency— A pocket of fluid at the
back of an embryo’s neck visible via ultrasound
that, when thickened, may indicate the infant will
be born with a congenital heart defect.
Septal— Relating to the septum, the thin muscle
wall dividing the right and left sides of the heart.
Holes in the septum are called septal defects.
Stenosis— The constricting or narrowing of an
opening or passageway.
Congenital heart disease
children with congenital heart disease have slower
growth, nutrition is important. Physicians also may
limit their athletic activity.
Prognosis
The outlook for children with congenital heart
disease has improved markedly in the past two dec-
ades. Many types of congenital heart disease that
would have been fatal now can be treated successfully.
Because many children with these defects survive into
adulthood, physicians and patients are reminded that
the patients will require continued medical observa-
tion as they mature. Research on diagnosing heart
defects when the fetus is in the womb may lead to
future treatment to correct defects before birth.
Promising new prevention methods and treatments
include genetic screening and the cultivation of cardiac
tissue in the laboratory that could be used to repair
congenital heart defects. As scientists continue to
advance the study of genetics, they also will better
understand genetic causes of many congenital heart
diseases. For example, scientists just discovered a
potential cause of atrioventricular canal defects in
the fall of 2003.
Resources
BOOKS
Mayo Clinic Heart Book.New York: William Morrow and
Company, 2000.
Wild, C. L., and M. J. Neary.Heart Defects in Children:
What Every Parent Should Know.Minneapolis:
Chronimed Publishing, 2000.
Williams, R. A.The Athlete and Heart Disease.Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
PERIODICALS
‘‘Adults With Congenital Heart Disease Need Continued
Medical Observation.’’Cardiovascular WeekAugust
23, 2004: 23.
‘‘AEP Underused for Congenital Heart Disease Patients.’’
Heart Disease WeeklyAugust 31, 2003: 23.
‘‘Coping with Congenital Heart Disease in Your Baby.’’
American Family Physician59 (April 1, 1999): 1867.
‘‘Deletions on Chromosome 1q21.1 Are Related to
Congenital Heart Disease.’’Heart Disease Weekly
August 22, 2004: 50.
Hyett, Jon, et. al. ‘‘Using Fetal Nuchal Translucency to
Screen for Major Congenital Cardiac Defects at 10-14
Weeks: Population Based Cohort Study.’’Lancet 318
(January 1999): 81-85.
‘‘MRI and CT Can Visualize Congenital Heart Disease.’’
Medical Devices & Surgical Technology WeekAugust
22, 2004: 76.
‘‘New Insight Offered into the Genetics of Congenital Heart
Disease.’’ Heart Disease WeeklyOctober 12, 2003: 3.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave., Dallas,
TX 75231-4596. (214) 373-6300 or (800) 242-8721.
inquire@heart.org. <http://www.americanheart.org>.
Congenital Heart Disease Information and Resources. 1561
Clark Dr., Yardley, PA 19067. <http://
www.tchin.org>.
Texas Heart Institute Heart Information Service. PO Box
20345, Houston, TX 77225-0345. (800) 292-2221.
<http://www.tmc.edu/thi/his.html>.
Melissa Knopper
Teresa G. Odle
Congenital hip dysplasia
Definition
A condition of abnormal development of the hip,
resulting in hip joint instability and potential disloca-
tion of the thigh bone from the socket in the pelvis.
This condition has been more recently termed devel-
opmental hip dysplasia, as it often develops over the
first few weeks, months, or years of life.
Description
Congenital hip dysplasia is a disorder in children
that is either present at birth or shortly thereafter.
During gestation, the infant’s hip should be developing
with the head of the thigh bone (femur) sitting perfectly
centered in its shallow socket (acetabulum). The acet-
abulum should cover the head of the femur as if it were
a ball sitting inside of a cup. In the event of congenital
hip dysplasia, the development of the acetabulum in an
infant allows the femoral head to ride upward out of the
joint socket, especially when weight bearing begins.
Causes and symptoms
Clinical studies show a familial tendency toward hip
dysplasia, with more females affected than males. This
disorder is found in many cultures around the world.
However, statistics show that the Native American
population has a high incidence of hip dislocation. This
has been documented to be due to the common practice
of swaddling and using cradleboards for restraining the
infants. This places the infant’s hips into extreme adduc-
tion (brought together). The incidence of congenital hip
dysplasia is also higher in infants born by caesarian and
breech position births. Evidence also shows a greater
chance of this hip abnormality in the first born compared
982 Congenital hip dysplasia
to the second or third child. Hormonal changes within
the mother duringpregnancy, resulting in increased liga-
ment laxity, is thought to possibly cross over to the
placenta and cause the baby to have lax ligaments
while still in the womb. Other symptoms of complete
dislocation include a shortening of the leg and limited
ability to abduct the leg.
Diagnosis
Because the abnormalities of this hip problem
often vary, a thoroughphysical examinationis neces-
sary for an accurate diagnosis of congenital hip dys-
plasia. The hip disorder can be diagnosed by moving
the hip to determine if the head of the femur is moving
in and out of the hip joint. One specific method, called
the Ortolani test, begins with each of the examiner’s
hands around the infant’s knees, with the second and
third fingers pointing down the child’s thigh. With the
legs abducted (moved apart), the examiner may be
able to discern a distinct clicking sound with motion.
If symptoms are present with a noted increase in
abduction, the test is considered positive for hip joint
instability. It is important to note this test is only valid
a few weeks after birth.
The Barlow method is another test performed with
the infant’s hip brought together with knees in full bent
position. The examiner’s middle finger is placed over
the outside of the hipbone while the thumb is placed on
the inner side of the knee. The hip is abducted to where
it can be felt if the hip is sliding out and then back in the
joint. In older babies, if there is a lack of range of
motion in one hip or even both hips, it is possible that
the movement is blocked because the hip has dislocated
and the muscles have contracted in that position. Also
in older infants, hip dislocation is evident if one leg
looks shorter than the other.
X-ray films can be helpful in detecting abnormal
findings of the hip joint. X rays may also be helpful in
finding the proper positioning of the hip joint for
treatments of casting. Ultrasound has been noted as
a safe and effective tool for the diagnosis of congenital
hip dysplasia. Ultrasound has advantages over x rays,
as several positions are noted during the ultrasound
procedure. This is in contrast to only one position
observed during the x ray.
Treatment
The objective of treatment is to replace the head of
the femur into the acetabulum and, by applying constant
pressure, to enlarge and deepen the socket. In the past,
stabilization was achieved by placing rolled cotton
diapers or a pillow between the thighs, thereby keeping
the knees in a frog like position. More recently, the
Pavlik harness and von Rosen splint are commonly
used in infants up to the age of six months. A stiff shell
cast may be used, which achieves the same purpose,
spreading the legs apart and forcing the head of the
femur into the acetabulum. In some cases, in older chil-
dren between six to 18 months, surgery may be necessary
to reposition the joint. Also at this age, the use of closed
manipulation may be applied successfully, by moving
the leg around manually to replace joint. Operations are
not only performed to reduce the dislocation of the hip,
but also to repair a defect in the acetabulum. A cast is
applied after the operation to hold the head of the femur
in the correct position. The use of a hometraction
program is now more common. However, after the age
of eight years, surgical procedures are primarily done for
painreduction measures only. Total hip surgeries may be
inevitable later in adulthood.
Alternative treatment
Nonsurgical treatments include exercise pro-
grams, orthosis (a force system, often involving
braces), and medications. A physical therapist may
develop a program that includes strengthening,
range-of-motion exercises, pain control, and func-
tional activities.Chiropractic medicine may be helpful,
especially the procedures of closed manipulations, to
reduce the dislocated hip joint.
Prognosis
Unless corrected soon after birth, abnormal stres-
ses cause malformation of the developing femur, with
a characteristic limp or waddling gait. If cases of con-
genital hip dysplasia go untreated, the child will have
difficulty walking, which could result in life-long pain.
In addition, if this condition goes untreated, the
abnormal hip positioning will force the acetabulum
to locate to another position to accommodate the
displaced femur.
KEY TERMS
Acetabulum— The large cup-shaped cavity at the
junction of pelvis and femur or thigh bone.
Orthosis— A force system designed to control or
correct or compensate for a bone deformity,
deforming forces, or forces absent from the body.
Congenital hip dysplasia
Prevention
Prevention includes proper prenatal care to deter-
mine the position of the baby in the womb. This may
be helpful in preparing for possible breech births asso-
ciated with hip problems. Avoiding excessive and pro-
longed infant hip adduction may help prevent strain
on the hip joints. Early diagnosis remains an impor-
tant part of prevention of congenital hip dysplasia.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275
Mamaroneck Ave., White Plains, NY 10605. (914)
428-7100. resourcecenter@modimes.org. <http://
www.modimes.org>.
Jeffrey P. Larson, RPT
Congenital lobar emphysema
Definition
Congenital lobaremphysema is a chronic disease
that causes respiratory distress in infants.
Description
Congenital lobar emphysema, also called infantile
lobar emphysema, is a respiratory disease that occurs
in infants when air enters the lungs but cannot leave
easily. The lungs become over-inflated, causing
respiratory function to decrease and air to leak out
into the space around the lungs.
Half of the cases of congenital lobar emphysema
occur in the first four weeks of life, and three-quarters
occur in infants less than six months old. Congenital
lobar emphysema is more common in boys than in
girls.
Each person has two lungs, right and left. The
right lung is divided into three sections, called lobes,
and the left lung into two lobes. Congenital lobar
emphysema usually affects only one lobe, and this is
usually an upper lobe. It occurs most frequently in the
left upper lobe, followed by the right middle lobe.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of congenital lobar emphysema often
cannot be identified. The airway may be obstructed or
the infant’s lungs may not have developed properly.
Congenital lobar emphysema is almost never of
genetic origin.
Symptoms of congenital lobar emphysema
include:
/C15shortness of breath
/C15wheezing
/C15lips and fingernail beds that have a bluish tinge
Diagnosis
Congenital lobar emphysema is usually identified
within the first two weeks of the infant’s life. It is
diagnosed by respiratory symptoms and a chest
x ray, which shows the over-inflation of the affected
lobe and may show a blocked air passage.
Treatment
For infants with no, mild, or intermittent symp-
toms, no treatment is necessary. For more serious
cases of congenital lobar emphysema, surgery is
necessary, usually a lobectomy to remove the affected
lung lobe.
Alternative treatment
Alternative treatments that may be helpful for
congenital lobar emphysema are aimed at supporting
and strengthening the patient’s respiratory function.
Vitamin and mineral supplementation may be recom-
mended as may herbal remedies such as lobelia
(Lobelia inflata) that strengthen the lungs and enhance
their elasticity. Homeopathic constitutional care may
also be beneficial for this condition.
Prognosis
Surgery for congenital lobar emphysema has
excellent results.
KEY TERMS
Congenital— A disease or condition that is present
at birth.
Emphysema— A condition in which the air sacs in
the lungs become overinflated, causing a decrease
in respiratory function.
Lobar— Relating to a lobe, a rounded projecting
part of the lungs.
984 Congenital lobar emphysema