DISEASE: Diabetes Mellitus
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Treatment
The best treatment for contact dermatitis is to
identify the allergen or irritating substance and avoid
further contact with it. If the culprit is, for instance, a
cosmetic, avoidance is a simple matter, but in some
situations, such as an allergy to an essential workplace
chemical for which no substitute can be found, avoid-
ance may be impossible or force the sufferer to find
new work or make other drastic changes in his or her
life. Barrier creams and protective clothing such as
gloves, masks, and long-sleeved shirts are ways of
coping with contact dermatitis when avoidance is
impossible, though they are not always effective.
For the symptoms themselves, treatments in mild
cases include cool compresses and nonprescription
lotions and ointments. When the symptoms are severe,
corticosteroids applied to the skin or taken orally are
used. Contact dermatitis that leads to a bacterial skin
infection is treated withantibiotics.
Alternative treatment
Herbal remedies have been used for centuries to
treat skin disorders including contact dermatitis. An
experienced herbalist can recommend the remedies
that will be most effective for an individual’s condi-
tion. Among the herbs often recommended are:
/C15burdock (Arctium lappa) minimizes inflammation
and boosts the immune system. It is taken internally
as a tea or tincture (a concentrated herbal extract
prepared with alcohol).
/C15calendula (Calendula officinalis) is a natural antisep-
tic and anti-inflammatory agent. It is applied topi-
cally in a lotion, ointment, or oil to the affected area.
/C15aloe (Aloe barbadensis) soothes skin irritations. The
gel is applied topically to the affected area.
A homeopath treating a patient with contact der-
matitis will do a thorough investigation of the indivi-
dual’s history and exposures before prescribing a
remedy. One homeopathic remedy commonly pre-
scribed to relieve the itching associated with contact
dermatitis isRhus toxicodendrontaken internally three
to four times daily.
Poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac are
common culprits in cases of allergic contact dermati-
tis. Following exposure to these plants, rash develop-
ment may be prevented by washing the area with soap
and water within 15 minutes of exposure. The leaves of
jewelweed (Impatiens spp.), which often grows near
poison ivy, may neutralize the poison-ivy allergen if
rubbed on the skin right after contact. Several topical
remedies may help relieve the itching associated with
allergic contact dermatitis, including the juice of plan-
tain leaves (Plantago major); a paste made of equal
parts of green clay and goldenseal root (Hydrastis
canadensis); a paste made of salt, water, clay, and
peppermint (Mentha piperita) oil; and calamine lotion.
Prognosis
If the offending substance is promptly identified
and avoided, the chances of a quick and complete
recovery are excellent. Otherwise, symptom manage-
ment–not cure–is the best doctors can offer. For some
The abdomen of a male patient afflicted with contact derma-
titis, triggered by an allergic reaction to a nickel belt buckle.
(Photograph by Dr. P. Marazzi, Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Antibiotics— Substances used against microorgan-
isms that cause infection.
Corticosteroids— A group of anti-inflammatory
substances often used to treat skin conditions.
Immune response— The protective reaction by the
immune system against foreign antigens (sub-
stances that the body perceives as potentially dan-
gerous). The immune system combats disease by
neutralizing or destroying antigens.
Contact dermatitis
people, contact dermatitis becomes a chronic and dis-
abling condition that can have a profound effect on
employability and quality of life.
Prevention
Avoidance of known or suspected allergens or
irritating substances is the best prevention. If avoid-
ance is difficult, barrier creams and protective clothing
can be tried. Skin that comes in contact with an
offending substance should be thoroughly washed as
soon as possible.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Beltrani, Vincent S., and Vincent P. Beltrani. ‘‘Contact
Dermatitis.’’ Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and
Immunology 78 (February 1997): 160-75.
Howard Baker
Contact lenses see Eye glasses and contact
lenses
Continent urinary diversion see Urinary
diversion surgery
Continuous ambulatory electrocardiography
see Holter monitoring
Continuous positive airway see Inhalation
therapies
Contraception
Definition
Contraception (birth control) preventspregnancy
by interfering with the normal process of ovulation,
fertilization, and implantation. There are different
kinds of birth control that act at different points in
the process.
Purpose
Every month, a woman’s body begins the process
that can potentially lead to pregnancy. An egg (ovum)
matures, the mucus that is secreted by the cervix (a
cylindrical-shaped organ at the lower end of the
uterus) changes to be more inviting to sperm, and the
lining of the uterus grows in preparation for receiving
a fertilized egg. Any woman who wants to prevent
pregnancy must use a reliable form of birth control.
Birth control (contraception) is designed to inter-
fere with the normal process and prevent the preg-
nancy that could result. There are different kinds of
birth control that act at different points in the process,
from ovulation, through fertilization, to implantation.
Each method has its own side effects and risks. Some
methods are more reliable than others.
There are more different types of birth control
available today than ever. They can be divided into a
few groups based on how they work. These groups
include:
/C15Hormonal methods—These use medications (hor-
mones) to prevent ovulation. Hormonal methods
include birth control pills ( oral contraceptives ),
Depo Provera injections, andNorplant.
/C15Barrier methods—These methods work by prevent-
ing the sperm from getting to and fertilizing the egg.
Barrier methods include thecondom, diaphragm, and
cervical cap. The condom is the only form of birth
control that also protects against sexually trans-
mitted diseases, including HIV (the virus that causes
AIDS).
/C15Spermicides—These medications kill sperm on con-
tact. Most spermicides contain nonoxynyl-9.
Spermicides come in many different forms such as
jelly, foam, tablets, and even a transparent film. All
are placed in the vagina. Spermicides work best when
they are used at the same time as a barrier method.
/C15Intrauterine devices—Intrauterine contraceptive
devices (IUDs) are inserted into the uterus, where
they stay from one to 10 years. AnIUD prevents
the fertilized egg from implanting in the lining of
the uterus, and may have other effects as well.
/C15Tubal sterilization—Tubal sterilization is a permanent
form of contraception for women. Each fallopian tube
is either tied or burned closed. The sperm cannot reach
the egg, and the egg cannot travel to the uterus.
Types Of Contraceptives
Effectiveness Predicted (%) Actual (%)
Birth control pills 99.9 97
Condoms 98 88
Depo Provera 99.7 99.7
Diaphragm 94 82
IUDs 99.2 97
Norplant 99.7 99.7
Tubal sterilization 99.8 99.6
Spermicides 97 79
Vasectomy 99.9 99.9
998 Contraception
/C15Vasectomy—is the male form of sterilization, and
should also be considered permanent. Invasectomy,
the vas defrens, the tiny tubes that carry the sperm
into the semen, are cut and tied off. Thus, no sperm
can get into the semen.
/C15A newer and somewhat controversial form of birth
control isemergency contraception. This type is used
after unprotected intercourse and sometimes is
referred to as the ‘‘morning-after pill’’.
Unfortunately, there is no perfect form of birth
control. Only abstinence (not having sexual inter-
course) can protect against unwanted pregnancy with
100% reliability. The failure rates, which means the
rates of pregnancy, for most forms of birth control are
quite low. However, some forms of birth control are
more difficult or inconvenient to use than others. In
actual practice, the birth control methods that are
more difficult or inconvenient have much higher fail-
ure rates because they are not used regularly or as
prescribed.
Description
Most forms of birth control have one thing in
common. They are only effective if used faithfully.
Birth control pills will work only if taken every day;
the diaphragm is effective only if used during every
episode of sexual intercourse. The same is true for con-
doms and the cervical cap. Some methods automati-
cally work every day. These methods include Depo
Provera, Norplant, the IUD, and tubal sterilization.
There are many different ways to use birth con-
trol. They can be divided into several groups:
/C15By mouth (oral)—Birth control pills must be taken
by mouth every day.
/C15Injected—Depo Provera is a hormonal medication
that is given by injection every three months.
/C15Implanted—Norplant is a long-acting hormonal
form of birth control that is implanted under the
skin of the upper arm.
/C15Vaginal—Spermicides and barrier methods work in
the vagina.
/C15Intra-uterine—The IUD is inserted into the uterus.
/C15Surgical—Tubal sterilization is a form of surgery. A
doctor must perform the procedure in a hospital or
surgical clinic. Many women need general
anesthesia.
The methods of birth control differ from each
other in the timing of when they are used. Some meth-
ods of birth control must be used specifically at the
time of sexual intercourse (condoms, diaphragm, cer-
vical cap, spermicides). Emergency contraception
must be started as soon as possible after intercourse
and no more than 72 hours after. All other methods
of birth control (hormonal methods, IUDs, tubal
Various types of contraception. (Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permissi)
A variety of intrauterine contraceptive devices. The probabil-
ity of a pregnancy for year of use is about 2 to 3%. IUDs made
with copper coils should be replaced every 3 to 5 years.(Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
Contraception
sterilization) must be working all the time to provide
protection.
Precautions
There are risks associated with certain forms of
birth control. Some of the risks of each method are
listed below:
/C15Birth control pills—The hormone (estrogen) in birth
control pills can increase the risk ofheart attackin
women over 35, particularly those who smoke.
Certain women cannot use birth control pills.
/C15IUD—The IUD can increase the risk of serious pel-
vic infection. The IUD can also injure the uterus by
poking into or through the uterine wall. Surgery
might be needed to fix this.
/C15Tubal sterilization—‘‘Tying the tubes’’ is a surgical
procedure and has all the risks of any other surgery,
including those associated with anesthesia, as well as
infection and bleeding.
/C15Emergency contraceptive pills should not be used
regularly for birth control. They can interrupt the
menstrual cycle and are not 100% effective. If the
emergency contraception fails, anectopic pregnancy
can occur.
Preparation
No specific preparation is needed before using
contraception. However, a woman must be sure that
she is not already pregnant before using a hormonal
method or having an IUD placed.
Aftercare
No aftercare is needed.
Risks
Many methods of birth control have side effects.
Knowing the side effects can help a woman to deter-
mine which method of birth control is right for her.
/C15Hormonal methods—The hormones in birth control
pills, Depo Provera, and Norplant can cause changes
in menstrual periods, changes in mood, weight gain,
acne, and headaches. In addition, it may take many
months to begin ovulating again once a woman stops
using Depo Provera or Norplant.
/C15Barrier methods—A woman must insert the dia-
phragm in just the right way to be sure that it
works properly. Some women get more urinary
tract infections if they use a diaphragm. This is
because the diaphragm can press against the urethra,
the tube that connects the bladder to the outside.
/C15Spermicides—Some women and men are allergic to
spermicides or find them irritating to the skin.
/C15IUD—The IUD is a foreign body that stays inside
the uterus, and the uterus tries to get it out. A woman
may have heavier menstrual periods and more men-
strual cramping with an IUD in place.
/C15Tubal sterilization—Some women report increased
menstrual discomfort aftertubal ligation. It is not
known if this is related to the tubal ligation itself.
There is no perfect form of birth control. Every
method has a small failure rate and side effects. Some
methods carry additional risks. However, every
method of birth control can be effective if used
properly.
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘Contraception; Overview.’’NWHRC Health Center –
Contraception March 9, 2004.
‘‘Ectopic Pregnancy Is a Possibility When Emergency
Contraception Fails.’’Health & Medicine WeekMarch
15, 2004: 222.
Amy B. Tuteur, MD
Teresa G. Odle
Contractures
Definition
Contractures are the chronic loss of joint motion
due to structural changes in non-bony tissue. These
KEY TERMS
Fallopian tubes— The thin tubes that connect the
ovary to the uterus. Ova (eggs) travel from the ovary
to the uterus. If the egg has been fertilized, it can
implant in the uterus.
Fertilization— The joining of the sperm and the
egg; conception.
Implantation— The process in which the fertilized
egg embeds itself in the wall of the uterus.
Ovulation— The release of an egg (ovum) from the
ovary.
1000 Contractures
non-bony tissues include muscles, ligaments, and
tendons.
Description
Contractures can occur at any joint of the body. This
joint dysfunction may be a result ofimmobilizationfrom
injury or disease; nerve injury, such as spinal cord damage
and stroke; or muscle, tendon, or ligament disease.
Causes and symptoms
There are a number of pathologies and diseases
that can lead to joint contractures. The primary causes
resulting in a joint contraction are muscle imbalance,
pain, prolonged bed rest, and immobilization. Because
of the frequency offractures and surgery, immobiliza-
tion is the most frequent cause of joint contractures.
Symptoms include a significant loss of motion to any
specific joint that results in immobility. If the contrac-
ture is of a significant degree, pain can result even
without any voluntary joint movement.
Diagnosis
Manual testing of joint mobility by a healthcare
professional skilled in joint mobilization techniques
(e.g., a physical therapist) will identify indications of
restricted structures within the joint. Measuring the
motion of the joint with a device termed a ‘‘goniometer’’
can be useful if the decrease of motion can be shown to
be a proven result of a joint contracture. X rays can be of
some benefit in the diagnosis of contractures, because a
visible decrease in joint space may indicate a tight, con-
tracted joint. Most physicians will make the diagnosis
after a thoroughphysical examinationinvolving physical
and manual testing of the joint motion.
Treatment
Manual techniques
Joint mobilization and stretching of soft tissues
is a common technique used to increase joint elasti-
city. Structures are stretched in similar directions to
those which take place upon normal joint motion.
Some healthcare professionals may use some form
of heat prior to the stretching and mobilization. If
appropriate, exercise may follow manual techniques
to help maintain the additional motion achieved.
Mechanical techniques
Devices known as continuous passive motion
machines are very popular, especially following
surgery of joints. Continuous passive motion
machines (CPM) are specifically adjusted to each indi-
vidual’s need. This method is administered within the
first 24–72 hours after the injury or surgery. The joint
is mechanically moved through the patient’s tolerable
motion. CPM machines have been proved to acceler-
ate the return motion process, allowing patients more
function in less time.
Casting or splinting
Casting or splinting techniques are used to pro-
vide a constant stretch to the soft tissues surrounding
a joint. It is most effective when used to increase
motion of a joint from prolonged immobilization. It
is also popular for treating contractures resulting
from an increase in muscle tone from nerve injury.
After an initial holding cast is applied for seven to 10
days, a series of positional casts are applied at weekly
intervals. Before the application of each new cast, the
joint is moved as much as can be tolerated by the
patient, and measured by a goniometer. When as
much motion as possible is obtained after stretching,
another final cast is applied to maintain the newly
acquired motion.
Surgery
In some cases, the contracture may be severe and
not respond to conservative treatment. In this event,
manipulation of the joint under ageneral anesthesia
may be necessary.
Alternative treatment
In some areas of the body,chiropractic techniques
have been found to be useful to improve motion.
Massage therapycan be beneficial by promoting addi-
tional circulation to joint structures, causing better
elasticity. Yoga can help prevent as well as rehabilitate
a contracture and can facilitate the return of joint
mobility.
KEY TERMS
Mobilization— Making movable, restoring the
power of motion in a joint. Movement which
increases joint mobility.
Muscle tone — Also termed tonus; the normal state
of balanced tension in the tissues of the body, espe-
cially the muscles.
Contractures
Prognosis
Prognosis of contractures will depend upon the
cause of the contracture. In general, the earlier the
treatment for the contracture begins, the better the
prognosis.
Prevention
Prevention of contractures and deformities from
spinal cord injury, fracture, and immobilization is
achieved through a program of positioning, splinting
if appropriate, and range-of-motion exercises either
manually or mechanically aided. These activities should
be started as early as possible for optimal results.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
The American College of Rheumatology. 1800 Century
Place, Suite 250, Atlanta, GA 30345. (404) 633-3777.
<http://www.rheumatology.org>.
American Physical Therapy Association. 1111 North
Fairfax St., Alexandria, VA 22314. (800) 999-2782.
<https://www.apta.org>.
Jeffrey P. Larson, RPT
Conversion disorder see Somatoform
disorders
Cooley’s anemiasee Thalassemia
Cooling treatments
Definition
Cooling treatments lower body temperature in
order to relievepain, swelling, constriction of blood
vessels, and to decrease the liklihood of cellular damage
by slowing the metabolism. Sponge baths, cold com-
presses, and cold packs are all wet cooling treatments.
Dry treatments, such as ice bags and chemical cold
packs, are also used to lower body temperature.
Purpose
The most common reason for cooling a body is
fever or hyperthermia (extremely high fever). The
body can sustain temperatures up to 104/C14F (40/C14C)
with relative safety; however, when temperatures rise
above 104
/C14F (40/C14C), damage to the brain, muscles,
blood, and kidneys is increasingly likely. Cooling
treatments are also applied immediately following
sprains, bruises, burns, eye injuries, andmuscle spasms
to help alleviate the resulting swelling, pain, and dis-
coloration of the skin.
Cooling treatments slow chemical reactions
within the body. For this reason, cooling tissues
below normal temperature (98.6
/C14F/37 /C14C) can prevent
injury from inadequate oxygen or nutrition. Cold
water drowning victims suffering fromhypothermia
(cooling of the body below its normal temperature)
have been successfully resuscitated after long periods
underwater without medical complications because of
this effect. For the past 40 years, heart surgeons have
been experimenting with hypothermia to protect
tissues from lack of blood circulation during an
operation. Neurosurgeons are also working with
hypothermia to protect the very sensitive brain tissues
during periods of absent or reduced blood flow.
Description
Depending on the medical need, various cooling
methods are used.
/C15Cold packs and ice bags are placed on a localized site
and provide topical relief. These compresses should
be covered with a waterproof material to protect the
skin. Repeated treatments produce the desired pain
and swelling relief.
/C15Cold treatments are placed on the groin and under
the arms to treat hyperthermia. Treatments are
refreshed periodically until the appropriate tempera-
ture is attained.
/C15A tepid sponge bath relieves fever without cooling
the body too fast. Eighty degrees Fahrenheit is still
20
/C14F below body temperature and yet warm enough
not to drive blood from the skin, thereby preventing
the cooling from getting to the body’s core. Limbs
are bathed first and then the chest, abdomen, back,
and buttocks.
/C15Perfusion of isolated regions like the brain by using
cooled blood is an experimental treatment, offering
promising results for the treatment of stroke.
Preparation
Topical treatments are prepared with ice, cold
water (59/C14F/15 /C14C), and chemical cold packs. Tepid
baths should be 80–93/C14F (26.7–34/C14C).
Risks
Small children, adults with circulation problems,
and the elderly are all at risk of tissue damage. Rapid
1002 Cooling treatments
cooling causes chills, which in effect raise the body’s
temperature by raising its metabolism.Blood clotsmay
form from thickened blood caused by the temperature
change.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Plattner, O., et al. ‘‘Efficacy of Intraoperative Cooling
Methods.’’ Anesthesiology 87 (November 1997):
1089-1095.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
Coombs’ tests
Definition
Coombs’ tests are blood tests that identify the
causes of anemia.
Purpose
Anemia, which literally means no blood, refers
to blood with abnormally low oxygen-carrying capa-
city. The hemoglobin in red blood cells carries oxy-
gen. One of the many causes of anemia is destruction
of red blood cells, a process called hemolysis (hemo
means blood andlysis means disintegration). A sim-
ple blood count detects anemia. Even the test done
before a blood donation can identify anemia. To
detect hemolysis requires other tests. The Coombs’
tests are conducted in orderto determine the cause of
anemia.
One characteristic of hemolysis is the autoim-
mune response against the body’s red blood cells.
Instead of protecting the body from outside agents,
the immune system attacks parts of its own body with
a deluge of antibodies. Autoimmunity is thought to
be the cause of many collagen-vascular diseases,
including rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus . It is also the cause of the autoimmune
hemolytic anemias. The Coombs’ tests detect the
antibodies responsible for the destruction of the red
blood cells.
Causes of autoimmunehemolytic anemiainclude:
/C15drugs such as penicillin, methyldopa (lowers blood
pressure), and quinidine (treats heart rhythm
disturbances)
/C15cancers of the lymph system–Hodgkin’s disease and
lymphomas
/C15virus infections
/C15collagen-vascular diseases
/C15mismatched blood transfusions
/C15Rh incompatibility between a mother and fetus.
(erythroblastosis fetalis)
Many times the cause cannot be identified.
Description
There are two Coombs’ tests. A direct Coombs’
test detects the two different antigens that might
induce hemolysis in the patient’s red blood cells.
An indirect Coombs’ test looks for antibodies to
someone else’s red blood cells in the patient’s
serum (the blood without the cells). Combining
the two tests gives clues to the origin of the
hemolysis.
Preparation
No preparation is needed for this test. It will
probably be among the second or third set of blood
tests done after anemia is diagnosed and there is a
suspicion that its cause is hemolysis.
Aftercare
Coombs’ tests are done on blood that is drawn
from the arm.
Risks
Taking blood for testing is the most common
medical procedure performed. The worst complica-
tion is a bruise at the site of the puncture or punctures.
It is extremely rare for the needle to injure an impor-
tant structure such as an artery or a nerve.
Normal results
If the Coombs’ tests are negative, the anemia is
unlikely to be autoimmune, and the hematologist will
have to search elsewhere for a cause.
Abnormal results
If the test is positive, the antigens that react will
narrow the search for a cause. Coombs’ tests are
also done for bloodtransfusion reactions to deter-
mine why the transfused blood did not match, and
when there is a chance a newborn may have an Rh
problem.
Coombs’ tests
Resources
BOOKS
Rosse, Wendell, and H. Franklin Bunn. ‘‘Hemolytic
Anemias and Acute Blood Loss.’’ InHarrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine, edited by Anthony S.
Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
Coordination tests see Balance and coordi-
nation tests
COPD see Emphysema; Chronic obstructive
lung disease
Copper deficiency see Mineral deficiency
Copper excess see Wilson’s disease
Cor pulmonale
Definition
Cor pulmonale is an increase in bulk of the right
ventricle of the heart, generally caused by chronic
diseases or malfunction of the lungs. This condition
can lead toheart failure.
Description
Cor pulmonale, or pulmonary heart disease,
occurs in 25% of patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). In fact, about 85% of
patients diagnosed with cor pulmonale have COPD.
Chronic bronchitis and emphysema are types of
COPD. High blood pressure in the blood vessels of
the lungs (pulmonary hypertension) causes the enlarge-
ment of the right ventricle. In addition to COPD, cor
pulmonale may also be caused by lung diseases, such
as cystic fibrosis, pulmonary embolism, and pneumo-
coniosis. Loss of lung tissue afterlung surgeryor cer-
tain chest-wall disturbances can produce cor
pulmonale, as can neuromuscular diseases, such as
muscular dystrophy. A large pulmonary thromboem-
bolism (blood clot) may lead to acute cor pulmonale.
Causes and symptoms
Any respiratory disease or malfunction that
affects the circulatory system of the lungs may lead
to cor pulmonale. These circulatory changes cause the
right ventricle to compensate for the extra work
required to pump blood through the lungs. The right
ventricle has thin walls and is crescent-shaped. The
resulting pressure causes the right ventricle to dilate
and bulge, eventually leading to its failure.
Cor pulmonale should be expected in any patient
with COPD and other respiratory or neuromuscular
diseases. Initial symptoms of cor pulmonale may actu-
ally reflect those of the underlying disease. These may
include chronic coughing,wheezing, weakness,fatigue,
and shortness of breath. Edema (abnormal buildup of
fluid), weakness, and discomfort in the upper chest
may be evident in cor pulmonale.
Diagnosis
An electrocardiograph (EKG) will show signs such
as frequent premature contractions in the atria or ven-
tricles. Chest x rays may show enlargement of the right
descending pulmonary artery. This sign, along with an
enlarged main pulmonary artery, indicates pulmonary
artery hypertension in patients with COPD.Magnetic
resonance imaging(MRI) is often the preferred method
of diagnosis for cor pulmonale because it can clearly
show and measure volume of the pulmonary arteries.
Other tests used to support a diagnosis of cor pulmo-
nale may include arterialblood gas analysis, pulmonary
function tests, andhematocrit.
KEY TERMS
Antibody— A protein made by the immune system
and used as a weapon against foreign invaders in
the body.
Antigen— The chemical that stimulates an immune
response.
Anemia— Reduced oxygen-carrying capacity of the
blood, due to too little hemoglobin or too few red
blood cells.
Collagen-vascular disease— Various diseases
inflaming and destroying connective tissue.
Hematologist— Physician who specializes in dis-
eases of the blood.
Hemoglobin— The red pigment in blood that car-
ries oxygen.
Hemolysis— Breaking apart red blood cells.
Rh— A blood typing group, like the ABO system.
When a mother is Rh negative and her baby is Rh
positive, she may develop antibodies to the baby’s
blood that will cause it to hemolyze.
1004 Cor pulmonale
Treatment
Treatment of cor pulmonale is aimed at increasing
a patient’s exercise tolerance and improving oxygen
levels of the arterial blood. Treatment is also aimed at
the underlying condition that is producing cor pulmo-
nale. Common treatments include antibiotics for
respiratory infection; anticoagulants to reduce the
risk of thromboembolism; and digitalis, oxygen, and
phlebotomy to reduce red blood cell count. A low-salt
diet and restricted fluids are often prescribed.
Alternative treatment
Co-management of the patient with cor pulmo-
nale should be coordinated between the medical doc-
tor and the alternative practitioner. The first step in
treatment is to determine the cause of the condition
and to evaluate all organ systems of the body. Dietary
considerations, for example, a low-salt diet and
reduced fluid intake aimed at reducing the edema
associated with cor pulmonale, can be supportive
aspects of treatment.
Prognosis
The prognosis for cor pulmonale is poor, particu-
larly because it occurs late in the process of serious
disease.
Prevention
Cor pulmonale is best prevented by prevention of
COPD and other irreversible diseases that lead to
heart failure. Smoking cessation is critically impor-
tant. Carefully following the recommended course of
treatment for the underlying disease may help prevent
cor pulmonale.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas,
TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://
www.americanheart.org>.
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov>.
Teresa Odle
Cori’s diseasesee Glycogen storage diseases
Corkscrew esophagus see Diffuse
esophageal spasm
Corneal abrasion
Definition
A corneal abrasion is a worn or scraped-off area
of the outer, clear layer of the eye (cornea).
Description
The cornea is the clear, dome-shaped outer area of
the eye. It lies in front of the colored part of the eye
(iris) and the black hole in the iris (pupil). The outer-
most layer of the eyeball consists of the cornea and the
white part of the eye (sclera). A corneal abrasion is
basically a superficial cut or scrape on the cornea. A
corneal abrasion is not as serious as a corneal ulcer,
which is generally deeper and more severe than an
abrasion.
Causes and symptoms
A corneal abrasion is usually the result of direct
injury to the eye, often from a fingernail scratch,
makeup brushes, contact lenses, foreign body, or
even twigs. Patients often complain of feeling a foreign
body in their eye, and they may havepain, sensitivity
to light, or tearing.
Diagnosis
Ophthalmologists and optometrists, who treat eye
disorders, are well qualified to diagnose corneal abra-
sions. The doctor will check the patient’s vision (visual
acuity) in both eyes with an eye chart. A patient his-
tory will also be taken, which may help to determine
the cause of the abrasion. A slit lamp, which is basi-
cally a microscope and light source, will allow the
doctor to see the abrasion. Fluorescein, a yellow dye,
may be placed into the eye to determine the extent of
the abrasion. The fluorescein will temporarily stain the
affected area.
KEY TERMS
Ventricle— A cavity, as in the brain or heart. The
right ventricle of the heart drives blood from the
heart into the pulmonary artery, which supplies
blood to the lungs.
Corneal abrasion
Treatment
The cornea has a remarkable ability to heal itself,
so treatment is designed to minimize complications. If
the abrasion is very small, the doctor might just sug-
gest an eye lubricant and a follow-up visit the next day.
A very small abrasion should heal in one to two days;
others usually in one week. However, to avoid a pos-
sible infection, an antibiotic eye drop may be pre-
scribed. Sometimes additional eye drops may make
the eye feel more comfortable. Depending upon the
extent of the abrasion, some doctors may patch the
affected eye. It is very important to go for the follow-
up checkup to make sure an infection does not occur.
Use of contact lenses should not be resumed without
the doctor’s approval.
Prognosis
In typical cases, the prognosis is good. The cornea
will heal itself, usually within several days. A very deep
abrasion may lead to scarring. If the abrasion does not
heal properly, a recurrent corneal erosion (RCE) may
result months or even years later. The symptoms are
the same as for an abrasion (e.g., tearing, foreign body
sensation, and blurred vision), but it will keep occur-
ring. Similar or additional treatment for the RCE may
be necessary.
Prevention
Everyone should wear eye protection whenever
this is recommended. This should be standard practice
when using power tools and playing certain sports.
Goggles should even be worn when mowing the
lawn, because a twig can be thrown upward toward
the face. Contact lens wearers should be careful to
follow their doctors’ instructions on caring for and
wearing their lenses. Ill-fitting or dirty lenses could
lead to an abrasion, so patients should go for their
prescribed checkups.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Family Physicians. 8880 Ward
Parkway, Kansas City, MO 64114. (816) 333-9700.
<http://www.aafp.org>.
Richard H. Lampert
Corneal infection see Keratitis
Corneal keratoplasty see Corneal
transplantation
Corneal transplantation
Definition
In corneal transplant, also known as keratoplasty,
a patient’s damaged cornea is replaced by the cornea
from the eye of a human cadaver. This is the single
most common type of human transplant surgery and
has the highest success rate. Eye banks acquire and
store eyes from donor individuals largely to supply the
need for transplant corneas.
KEY TERMS
Abrasion— An area of the body whose surface has
been worn away by some abnormal process.
Cornea— The transparent structure on the front part
of the eye.
Recurrent corneal erosion (RCE) — Repeated ero-
sion of the cornea. May be a result of inadequate
healing of a previous abrasion.
Slit lamp— An instrument used to examine the front
of the eye.
 A close-up view of an abrasion on patient’s cornea.
(Photograph by Dennis R. Cain, CRA, Custom Medical Stock
Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
1006 Corneal transplantation
Purpose
Corneal transplant is used when vision is lost in an
eye because the cornea has been damaged by disease or
traumatic injury. Some of the disease conditions that
might require corneal transplant include the bulging
outward of the cornea (keratoconus), a malfunction of
the inner layer of the cornea (Fuchs’ dystrophy), and
painful swelling of the cornea (pseudophakic bullous
keratopathy). Some of these conditions cause cloudi-
ness of the cornea; others alter its natural curvature,
which can also reduce the quality of vision.
Injury to the cornea can occur because of chemical
burns, mechanical trauma, or infection by viruses,
bacteria, fungi, or protozoa. The herpes virus pro-
duces one of the more common infections leading to
corneal transplant.
Surgery would only be used when damage to the
cornea is too severe to be treated with corrective
lenses. Occasionally, corneal transplant is combined
with other types of eye surgery (such as cataract
surgery) to solve multiple eye problems in one
procedure.
Precautions
Corneal transplant is a very safe procedure that
can be performed on almost any patient who would
benefit from it. Any active infection or inflammation
of the eye usually needs to be brought under control
before surgery can be performed.
Description
The cornea is the transparent layer of tissue at the
very front of the eye. It is composed almost entirely of
a special type of collagen. It normally contains no
blood vessels, but because it contains nerve endings,
damage to the cornea can be very painful.
In a corneal transplant, a disc of tissue is
removed from the center of the eye and replaced by
a corresponding disc from a donor eye. The circular
incision is made using an instrument called a tre-
phine. In one form of corneal transplant (penetrating
keratoplasty), the disc removed is the entire thick-
ness of the cornea and so is the replacement disc.
Over 90% of all corneal transplants in the United
States are of this type. In lamellar keratoplasty, on
the other hand, only the outer layer of the cornea is
removed and replaced.
The donor cornea is attached with extremely fine
sutures. Surgery can be performed under anesthesia
that is confined to one area of the body while the
patient is awake (local anesthesia) or under anesthesia
that places the entire body of the patient in a state
of unconsciousness (general anesthesia). Surgery
requires 30–90 minutes.
Over 40,000 corneal transplants are performed in
the United States each year. Medicare reimbursement
for a corneal transplant in one eye was about $1,200 in
1997.
A less common but related procedure called epi-
keratophakia involves suturing the donor cornea
directly onto the surface of the existing host cornea.
The only tissue removed from the host is the extremely
thin epithelial cell layer on the outside of the host
cornea. There is no permanent damage to the host
cornea, and this procedure can be reversed. It is
usually employed in children. In adults, the use of
contact lenses can usually achieve the same goals.
Preparation
No special preparation for corneal transplant is
needed. Some eye surgeons may request the patient
have a completephysical examinationbefore surgery.
The patient may also be asked to skip breakfast on the
day of surgery.
Aftercare
Corneal transplant is often performed on an out-
patient basis, although some patients need brief hos-
pitalization after surgery. The patient will wear an eye
patch at least overnight. An eye shield or glasses must
be worn to protect the eye until the surgical wound has
healed. Eye drops will be prescribed for the patient to
use for several weeks after surgery. These drops
include antibiotics to prevent infection as well as
A corneal transplant in progress. (Photograph by Chet
Szymecki, Phototake NYC. Reproduced by permission.)
Corneal transplantation
corticosteroids to reduce inflammation and prevent
graft rejection.
For the first few days after surgery, the eye may
feel scratchy and irritated. Vision will be somewhat
blurry for as long as several months.
Sutures are often left in place for six months, and
occasionally for as long as two years.
Risks
Corneal transplants are highly successful, with
over 90% of operations in United States achieving
restoration of sight. However, there is always some
risk associated with any surgery. Complications that
can occur include infection,glaucoma, retinal detach-
ment, cataract formation, and rejection of the donor
cornea.
Graft rejection occurs in 5–30% of patients, a
complication possible with any procedure involving
tissue transplantation from another person (allograft).
Allograft rejection results from a reaction of the
patient’s immune system to the donor tissue. Cell sur-
face proteins called histocompatibility antigens trigger
this reaction. These antigens are often associated with
vascular tissue (blood vessels) within the graft tissue.
Since the cornea normally contains no blood vessels, it
experiences a very low rate of rejection. Generally,
blood typingand tissue typingare not needed in corneal
transplants, and no close match between donor and
recipient is required. Symptoms of rejection include
persistent discomfort, sensitivity to light, redness, or a
change in vision.
If a rejection reaction does occur, it can usually be
blocked by steroid treatment. Rejection reactions may
become noticeable within weeks after surgery, but may
not occur until 10 or even 20 years after the transplant.
When full rejection does occur, the surgery will usually
need to be repeated.
Although the cornea is not normally vascular,
some corneal diseases cause vascularization (the
growth of blood vessels) into the cornea. In patients
with these conditions, careful testing of both donor
and recipient is performed just as in transplantation of
other organs and tissues such as hearts, kidneys, and
bone marrow. In such patients, repeated surgery is
sometimes necessary in order to achieve a successful
transplant.
Cornea donors are carefully screened. Individuals
with infectious diseases are not accepted as donors.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,
P.O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424.
<http://www.eyenet.org>.
Victor Leipzig, PhD
KEY TERMS
Cadaver— The human body after death.
Cataract— A condition of cloudiness of the lens of
the eye.
Cornea— The transparent layer of tissue at the very
front of the eye.
Corticosteroids— Synthetic hormones widely used
to fight inflammation.
Epikeratophakia— A procedure in which the donor
cornea is attached directly onto the host cornea.
Epithelial cells— Cells that form a thin surface coat-
ing on the outside of a body structure.
Fibrous connective tissue— Dense tissue found in
various parts of the body containing very few living
cells.
Fuchs’ dystrophy— A hereditary disease of the
inner layer of the cornea. Treatment requires pene-
trating keratoplasty. The lens of the eye may also be
affected and require surgical replacement at the
same time as the cornea.
Glaucoma— A vision defect caused when exces-
sive fluid pressure within the eye damages the
optic nerve.
Histocompatibility antigens— Proteins scattered
throughout body tissues that are unique for almost
every individual.
Keratoconus— An eye condition in which the cor-
nea bulges outward, interfering with normal vision.
Usually both eyes are affected.
Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy— Painful swel-
ling of the cornea occasionally occurring after sur-
gery to implant an artificial lens in place of a lens
affected by cataract.
Retinal detachment— A serious vision disorder in
which the light-detecting layer of cells inside the
eye (retina) is separated from its normal support
tissue and no longer functions properly.
Trephine— A small surgical instrument that is
rotated to cut a circular incision.
1008 Corneal transplantation
Corneal ulcers
Definition
The cornea, the clear front part of the eye
through which light passes, is subject to many infec-
tions and to injury from exposure and fromforeign
objects. Infection and injury cause inflammation of
the cornea–a condition called keratitis. Tissue loss
because of inflammation produces an ulcer. The
ulcer can either be centrally located, thus greatly
affecting vision, or peripherally located. There are
about 30,000 cases of bacterial corneal ulcers in the
United States each year.
Description
The most common cause of corneal ulcers is
germs, but most of them cannot invade a healthy
cornea with adequate tears and a functioning eyelid.
They gain access because injury has impaired these
defense mechanisms. A direct injury from a foreign
object inoculates germs directly through the outer
layer of the cornea, just as it does to the skin. A caustic
chemical can inflame the cornea by itself or so damage
it that germs can invade. Improper use of contact
lenses has become a common cause of corneal injury.
Eyelid or tear function failure is the other way to make
the eye vulnerable to infection. Tears and the eyelid
together wash the eye and prevent foreign material
from settling in. Tears contain enzymes and other
substances to help protect against infection. Certain
diseases dry up tear production, leaving the cornea dry
and defenseless. Other diseases paralyze or weaken the
eyelids so that they cannot effectively protect and
cleanse the eyes.
Causes and symptoms
Viruses, bacteria, fungi, and a protozoan called
Acanthamoeba can all invade the cornea and damage it
under suitable conditions.
/C15Bacteria from a common conjunctivitis (pink eye)
rarely spread to the cornea, but can if untreated.
/C15Fecal bacteria are more likely to be able to infect the
cornea.
/C15A bacterium calledPseudomonas aeruginosa, which
can contaminate eyedrops, is particularly able to
cause corneal infection.
/C15A group of incomplete bacteria known asChlamydia
can be transmitted to the eye directly by flies or dirty
hands. One form of chlamydial infection is the
leading cause of blindness in developing countries
and is known as Egyptian ophthalmia ortrachoma.
Another type ofChlamydia causes a sexually trans-
mitted disease.
/C15Other sexually transmitted diseases–for example,
syphilis–can affect the cornea.
The most common viruses to damage the cornea
are adenoviruses and herpes viruses. Viral and fungal
infections are often caused by improper use of topical
corticosteroids. If topical corticosteroids are used in a
patient with the herpes simplex keratitis, the ulcer can
get much worse and blindness could result.
Symptoms are obvious. The cornea is intensely
sensitive, so corneal ulcers normally produce severe
pain. If the corneal ulcer is centrally located, vision is
impaired or completely absent. Tearing is present and
the eye is red. It hurts to look at bright lights.
Diagnosis
The doctor will take a case history to try to deter-
mine the cause of the ulcer. This can include improper
use of contact lenses; injury, such as a scratch from a
twig; or severe dry eye. An instrument called a slit
lamp will be used to examine the cornea. The slit
lamp is a microscope with a light source that magnifies
the cornea, allowing the extent of the ulcer to be seen.
Fluorescein, a yellow dye, may be used to illuminate
further detail. If a germ is responsible for the ulcer,
identification may require scraping samples directly
from the cornea, conjunctiva, and lids, and sending
them to the laboratory.
Treatment
A corneal ulcer needs to be treated aggressively, as
it can result in loss of vision. The first step is to eliminate
infection. Broad spectrum antibiotics will be used
before the lab results come back. Medications may
then be changed to more specifically target the cause
of the infection. A combination of medications may be
necessary. Patients should return for their follow-up
visits so that the doctor can monitor the healing pro-
cess. The cornea can heal from many insults, but if it
remains scarred,corneal transplantationmay be neces-
sary to restore vision. If the corneal ulcer is large,
hospitalization may be necessary.
Prognosis
Treated early enough, corneal infections will
usually resolve, perhaps even without the formation
of an ulcer. However, left untreated, infections can
Corneal ulcers
lead to ulcers and the corneal ulcer can result in scar-
ring or perforation of the cornea. Other problems may
occur as well, includingglaucoma. Patients with cer-
tain systemic diseases that impede healing (such as
diabetes mellitus or rheumatoid arthritis) may need
more aggressive treatment. The later the treatment,
the more damage will be done and the more scarring
will result. Corneal transplant is standard treatment
with a high probability of success.
Prevention
Attentive care of contact lenses will greatly reduce
the incidence of corneal damage and ulceration.
Germs that cause no problems in the mouth or on
the hands can damage the eye, so contact lens wearers
must wash their hands before touching their lenses and
must not use saliva to moisten them. Tap water should
not be used to rinse the lenses. Contacts should be
removed whenever there is irritation and left out
until the eyes are back to normal. It is not advisable
to wear contact lenses while swimming or in hot tubs.
Daily wear contact lenses have been found to be less of
a risk than contacts for overnight wear (extended
wear). Organisms have been cultured from contact
lens cases, so the cases should be rinsed in hot water
and allowed to air dry. Cases should be replaced every
three months. Patients should follow their doctors’
schedules for replacement of the contacts.
Eye protection in the workplace, or wherever tiny
particles are flying around, is essential. Ultraviolet
(UV) coatings on glasses or sunglasses can help pro-
tect the eyes from the sun’s rays. Goggles with UV
protection should be worn when skiing or in suntan-
ning salons to protect against UV rays. Prompt atten-
tion to any red eye should prevent progressive
damage.
For people with inadequate tears, use of artificial
tears eyedrops will prevent damage from drying.
Eyelids that do not close adequately may temporarily
have to be sewn shut to protect the eye until more
lasting treatment can be instituted.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street,
P.O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424.
<http://www.eyenet.org>.
American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh
Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. <http://
www.aoanet.org>.
Prevent Blindness America. 500 East Remington Road,
Schaumburg, IL 60173. (800) 331-2020. <http://
www.preventblindness.org>.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
Corns and calluses
Definition
A corn is a small, painful, raised bump on the
outer skin layer. A callus is a rough, thickened patch
of skin.
Description
Corns and calluses are one of the three major foot
problems in the United States. The other two are foot
infections and toenail problems. Corns and calluses
affect about 5% of the population.
Corns usually appear on non-weight-bearing
areas like the outside of the little toe or the tops of
A close-up view of an ulcer on cornea.(Custom Medical Stock
Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Fluorescein— A fluorescent chemical used to
examine the cornea.
Germ— A disease-causing microorganism.
Inflammation— The body’s reaction to irritation.
Topical corticosteroids— Cortisone and related
drugs used on the skin and in the eye, usually for
allergic conditions.
1010 Corns and calluses
other toes. Women have corns more often than men,
probably because women wear high-heeled shoes and
other shoes that do not fit properly. Corns have hard
cores shaped like inverted pyramids. Sharppain occurs
whenever downward pressure is applied, and a dull
ache may be felt at other times.
Calluses occur most often on the heels and balls of
the feet, the knees, and the palms of the hands.
However, they can develop on any part of the body
that is subject to repeated pressure or irritation.
Calluses are usually more than an inch wide–larger
than corns. They generally don’t hurt unless pressure
is applied.
Types of corns
A hard corn is a compact lump with a thick core.
Hard corns usually form on the tops of the toes, on the
outside of the little toe, or on the sole of the foot.
A soft corn is a small, inflamed patch of skin with
a smooth center. Soft corns usually appear between
the toes.
A seed corn is the least common type of corn.
Occurring only on the heel or ball of the foot, a seed
corn consists of a circle of stiff skin surrounding a plug
of cholesterol.
Types of calluses
A plantar callus, a callus that occurs on the sole of
the foot, has a white center. Hereditary calluses
develop where there is no apparent friction, run in
families, and occur most often in children.
Causes and symptoms
Corns and calluses form to prevent injury to skin
that is repeatedly pinched, rubbed, or irritated. The
most common causes are:
/C15shoes that are too tight or too loose, or have very
high heels
/C15tight socks or stockings
/C15deformed toes
/C15walking down a long hill, or standing or walking on a
hard surface for a long time
Jobs or hobbies that cause steady or recurring
pressure on the same spot can also cause calluses.
Symptoms include hard growths on the skin in
response to direct pressure. Corns may be extremely
sore and surrounded by inflamed, swollen skin.
Diagnosis
Corns can be recognized on sight. A family phy-
sician or podiatrist may scrape skin off what seems to
be a callus, but may actually be a wart. If the lesion is a
wart, it will bleed. A callus will not bleed, but will
reveal another layer of dead skin.
Treatment
Corns and calluses do not usually require medical
attention unless the person who has them hasdiabetes
mellitus, poor circulation, or other problems that
make self-care difficult.
Treatment should begin as soon as an abnormal-
ity appears. The first step is to identify and eliminate
the source of pressure. Placing moleskin pads over
corns can relieve pressure, and large wads of cotton,
lamb’s wool, or moleskin can cushion calluses.
Using hydrocortisone creams or soaking feet in a
solution of Epsom salts and very warm water for at
least five minutes a day before rubbing the area with a
pumice stone will remove part or all of some calluses.
Rubbing corns just makes them hurt more.
Applying petroleum jelly or lanolin-enriched
hand lotion helps keep skin soft, but corn-removing
ointments that contain acid can damage healthy skin.
They should never be used by pregnant women or by
people who are diabetic or who have poor circulation.
Corns on toes. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by
permission.)
Corns and calluses