DISEASE: Dysentery
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

/C15BSE injected into monkeys produces a disease very
similar to vCJD
/C15BSE and vCJD produce the same brain lesions after
the same incubation period when injected into
laboratory mice
/C15brain proteins isolated from vCJD victims, but not
from the other forms of CJD, share similar molecular
characteristics with brain proteins of animals that
died from BSE
Researchers now treat the BSE-vCJD connection
as solidly established.
Assuming that BSE is the source, the question that
has loomed from the beginning has been how many
people will eventually be affected. Epidemiological
models once placed estimates at tens of thousands,
but in 2003, scientists predicted a quicker end to the
epidemic and have substantially lowered the numbers
expected to contract the disease. The exact incubation
period of vCJD in humans is about 10 to 20 years or
longer, so it is more difficult to predict the number of
cases. Researchers know that some people are more
susceptible to vCJD, including young people age 10 to
20 years old.
Causes and symptoms
Causes
It is clear that Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease is caused
by an infectious agent, but it is not yet clear what type
of agent that is. Originally assumed to be a virus,
evidence is accumulating that, instead, CJD is caused
by a protein called a prion (PREE-on, for ‘‘proteinac-
eous infectious particle’’) transmitted from victim to
victim. The other spongiform encephalopathies also
are hypothesized to be due to prion infection.
If this hypothesis is proven true, it would repre-
sent one of the most radical new ideas in biology since
the discovery of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). All
infectious diseases, in fact all life, use nucleic acids—
DNA or ribonucleic acid (RNA)—to code the instruc-
tions needed for reproduction. Inactivation of the
nucleic acids destroys the capacity to reproduce.
However, when these same measures are applied to
infected tissue from spongiform encephalopathy vic-
tims, infectivity is not destroyed. Furthermore, purifi-
cation of infected tissue to concentrate the infectious
fraction yields protein, not nucleic acid. While it
remains possible that some highly stable nucleic acid
remains hidden within the purified protein, this is see-
mingly less and less likely as further experiments are
done. The ‘‘prion hypothesis,’’ as it is called, is now
widely accepted, at least provisionally, by most
researchers in the field. The most vocal proponent of
the hypothesis, Stanley Prusiner, was awarded the
Nobel Prize in 1997 for his work in the prion diseases.
A prion is an altered form of a normal brain
protein. The normal protein has a helical shape along
part of its length. In the prion form, a sheet structure
replaces the helix. According to the hypothesis, when
the normal form interacts with the prion form, some of
its helical part is converted to a sheet, thus creating a
new prion capable of transforming other normal
forms. In this way, the disease process resembles crys-
tallization more than typical viral infection, in which
the virus commands the host’s cellular machinery to
reproduce more of the virus. Build-up of the sheet
form causes accumulation of abnormal protein
clumps and degeneration of brain cells, which is
thought to cause the disease.
The brain protein affected by the prion, called
PrP, is part of the membrane of brain cells, but its
exact function is unknown. Exposure to the infectious
agent is, of course, still required for disease develop-
ment. Prion diseases are not contagious in the usual
sense, and transmission from an infected person to
another person requires direct inoculation of infec-
tious material.
Familial CJD, on the other hand, does not require
exposure, but develops through the inheritance of
other, more disruptive mutations in the gene for the
normal PrP protein. The other two inherited human
prion diseases, Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker dis-
ease and fatal familial insomnia, involve different
mutations in the same gene.
The large majority of CJD cases are sporadic,
meaning they have no known route of infection or
genetic link. Causes of sporadic CJD are likely to be
diverse and may include spontaneous genetic muta-
tion, spontaneous protein changes, or unrecognized
exposure to infectious agents. It is highly likely that
future research will identify more risk factors asso-
ciated with sporadic CJD.
Symptoms
About one in four people with CJD begin their
illness with weakness, changes in sleep patterns,
weight loss, or loss of appetite or sexual drive. A
person with CJD may first complain of visual distur-
bances, including double vision, blurry vision, or par-
tial loss of vision. Some visual symptoms are
secondary to cortical blindness related to death of
nerve cells in the occipital lobe of the brain responsible
for vision. This form of visual loss is unusual in that
patients may be unaware that they are unable to see.
1054 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
These symptoms may appear weeks to months before
the onset of dementia.
The most characteristic symptom of CJD is
rapidly progressing dementia, or loss of mental func-
tion. Dementia is marked by:
/C15memory losses
/C15impaired abstraction and planning
/C15language and comprehension disturbances
/C15poor judgment
/C15disorientation
/C15decreased attention and increased restlessness
/C15personality changes and psychosis
/C15hallucinations
Muscle spasms and jerking movements, called
myoclonus, are also a prominent symptom of CJD.
Balance and coordination disturbance (ataxia), is
common in CJD, and is more pronounced in nvCJD.
Stiffness, difficulty moving, and other features repre-
senting Parkinson’s disease are seen and can progress
to akineticmutism, which is a state of being unable to
speak or move.
Diagnosis
CJD is diagnosed by a clinical neurological exam
and electroencephalography (EEG), which shows
characteristic spikes called triphasic sharp waves.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed
tomography scans (CT) should be done to exclude
other forms of dementia, and in CJD typically shows
atrophy or loss of brain tissue. Lumbar puncture, or
spinal tap, may be done to rule out other causes of
dementia (as cell count, chemical analysis, and other
routine tests are normal in CJD) and to identify ele-
vated levels of marker proteins known as 14-3-3.
Another marker, neuron-specific enolase, may also
be increased in CJD. CJD is conclusively diagnosed
after death by brainautopsy. Scientists are investigat-
ing whether testing lymphatic tissue such as the tonsil
may be an early tool in vCJD diagnosis. Additionally,
recent studies have suggested that other blood tests
may be useful as well.
Treatment
There is no cure for CJD, and no treatment that
slows the progression of the disease. Drug therapy and
nursing care are aimed at minimizing psychiatric symp-
toms and increasing patient comfort. However, the
rapid progression of CJD frustrates most attempts at
treatment, since decreasing cognitive function and
more prominent behavioral symptoms develop so
quickly. Despite the generally grim prognosis, a few
CJD patients progress more slowly and live longer
than the average; for these patients, treatment will be
more satisfactory. Scientists are investigating whether
some medicines that can ‘‘break’’ the abnormal protein
form may be useful and whether a vaccine could help.
Prognosis
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease has proven invariably
fatal, with death following symptom onset by an aver-
age of eight months. About 5% of patients live longer
than two years. Death from vCJD has averaged
approximately 12 months after onset. However, in
2003, clinicians reported improvement in a patient
with vCJD who received a new experimental drug
called Pentosan.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent sporadic CJD, by
far the most common type. Not everyone who inherits
the gene mutation for familial CJD will develop the
disease, but at present, there is no known way to predict
who will and who will not succumb. The incidence of
iatrogenic CJD has fallen with recognition of its sources,
the development of better screening techniques for
infected tissue, and the use of sterilization techniques
for surgical instruments that inactivate prion proteins.
Fortunately, scientists are making progress. In 2003,
researchers announced that they had uncovered the
basis for diagnosing, treating and possibly preventing
prion diseases such as vCJD. Their research possibly
could lead to a vaccine and immunotherapy drugs.
Strategies for prevention of vCJD are a contro-
versial matter, as they involve a significant sector of
KEY TERMS
Autosomal dominant inheritance— A pattern of
inheritance in which a trait will be expressed if
the gene is inherited from either parent.
Encephalopathy— Brain disorder characterized by
memory impairment and other symptoms.
Iatrogenic— Caused by a medical procedure.
Nucleic acids— The cellular molecules DNA and
RNA that act as coded instructions for the produc-
tion of proteins and are copied for transmission of
inherited traits.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
the agricultural industry and a central feature of the
diet in many countries. The infectious potential of
contaminated meat is unknown, because the ability
to detect prions within meat is limited. Surveillance
of North American herds strongly suggests there is no
BSE here, and strict regulations on imports of
European livestock make future outbreaks highly
unlikely. Therefore, avoidance of all meat originating
in North America, simply on grounds of BSE risk, is a
personal choice unsupported by current data.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Brown, Paul, et al. ‘‘Ultra-high Pressure Inactivation of
Prion Infectivity in Processed Meat: A Practical
Method to Prevent Human Infection.’’Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
May 13, 2003: 6093-6095.
‘‘GP Sees Patient with vCJD Improve.’’Pulse June 23,
2003: 12.
Kaye, Donald. ‘‘FDA Launches New Mad Cow Rules to
Protect U.S. Food, Feed.’’Clinical Infectious Diseases
March 15, 2004: 3–5.
‘‘Large Human Mad Cow Epidemic Unlikely— Scientists.’’
Clinical Infectious DiseasesApril 15, 2003: i.
‘‘Report Appears to Confirm Blood-borne Transmission of
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease.’’Blood WeeklyJanuary 8,
2004: 28.
‘‘Researchers Discover Possible Diagnosis, Treatment,
Vaccine.’’ Immunotherapy WeeklyJune 25, 2003: 2.
‘‘Scientists Predict Swift End to vCJD Epidemic.’’British
Medical JournalMay 24, 2003: 1104 -1111.
‘‘U.S. Lawmakers Want Increase in Mad Cow Testing.’’
Healthcare Purchasing NewsMarch 2004: 85.
Larry I. Lutwick, MD
Teresa G. Odle
Cri du chat syndrome
Definition
Cri du chat syndrome occurs when a piece of
chromosomal material is missing from a particular
region on chromosome 5. The disorder is also called
cat cry syndrome or chromosome deletion 5p syn-
drome. Individuals with this syndrome have unusual
facial features, poor muscle tone (hypotonia), small
head size (microcephaly), and mental retardation. A
classic feature of the syndrome is the cat-like cry
made by infants with this disorder.
Description
Dr. Jerome Lejeune first described cri du chat
syndrome in 1963. The syndrome is named for the
cat-like cry made by infants with this genetic disorder.
Cri du chatmeans ‘‘cat’s cry’’ in French. This unusual
cry is caused by abnormal development of the larynx
(organ in the throat responsible for voice production).
Cri du chat syndrome is also called 5p deletion
syndrome because it is caused by a deletion, or
removal, of genetic material from chromosome 5.
The deletion that causes cri du chat syndrome occurs
on the short or ‘‘p’’ arm of chromosome 5. This
deleted genetic material is vital for normal develop-
ment. Absence of this material results in the features
associated with cri du chat syndrome.
A high-pitched mewing cry during infancy is a
classic feature of cri du chat. Infants with cri du chat
also typically have low birth weight, slow growth, a
small head (microcephaly) and poor muscle tone
(hypotonia). Infants with cri du chat may have con-
genital heart defects. Individuals with cri du chat syn-
drome have language difficulties, delayed motor skill
development, and mental retardation. Behavioral
problems may also develop as the child matures.
It has been estimated that cri du chat syndrome
occurs in one of every 50,000 live births. It accounts
for 1 in every 500 cases of mental retardation.
According to the 5p minus Society, approximately
50–60 children are born with cri du chat syndrome in
the United States each year. It can occur in all races
and in both sexes, although there is a slight female
predominance. The male:female ratio is 3:4.
Causes and symptoms
Cri du chat is the result of a chromosome
abnormality—a deleted piece of chromosomal mate-
rial on chromosome 5. In about 80% of patients,
the defective chromosome comes from the father.
In 90% of patients with cri du chat syndrome, the
deletion is sporadic. This means that it happens
randomly and is not hereditary. If a child has cri du
chat due to a sporadic deletion, the chance the
parents could have another child with cri du chat is
1%. In approximately 10% of patients with cri du
chat, there is a hereditary chromosomal rearrange-
ment that causes the deletion. If a parent has this
rearrangement, the risk for them to have a child with
cri du chat is greater than 1%.
The severity ofmental retardation in cri du chat
syndrome is correlated with the extent of deletion of
delta-catenin, a protein with an important role in
1056 Cri du chat syndrome
brain functioning. The more extensive the deletion, the
more profound the mental dysfunction.
An abnormal larynx causes the unusual cat-like
cry made by infants that is a hallmark of the syn-
drome. As children with cri du chat get older, the
cat-like cry becomes less noticeable. This feature can
make the diagnosis more difficult in older patients. In
addition to the cat-like cry, individuals with cri du chat
also have unusual facial features. These facial dif-
ferences can be very subtle or more obvious.
Microcephaly (small head size) is common. During
infancy many patients with cri du chat do not gain
weight or grow normally. Approximately 30% of
infants with cri du chat have a congenital heart defect.
Hypotonia (poor muscle tone) is also common, lead-
ing to problems with eating and slow, but normal
development. Mental retardation is present in all
patients with cri du chat, but the degree of mental
retardation varies among patients.
Diagnosis
During infancy, the diagnosis of cri du chat syn-
drome is strongly suspected if the characteristic cat-
like cry is heard. If a child has this unusual cry or other
features seen in cri du chat syndrome, chromosome
testing should be performed. Chromosome analysis
provides the definitive diagnosis of cri du chat
syndrome and can be performed from a blood
test. Chromosome analysis, also called karyotyping,
involves staining the chromosomes and examining
them under a microscope. In some cases the deletion
of material from chromosome 5 can be easily seen. In
other cases, further testing must be performed. FISH
(fluorescence in-situ hybridization) is a special techni-
que that detects very small deletions. The majority of
the deletions that cause cri du chat syndrome can be
identified using the FISH technique.
Cri du chat syndrome can be detected before birth
if the mother undergoesamniocentesis testing orchor-
ionic villus sampling(CVS). This testing would only
be recommended if the mother or father is known to
have a chromosome rearrangement, or if they already
have a child with cri du chat syndrome.
Treatment
As of 2004 there is no cure for cri du chat syn-
drome. Treatment consists of supportive care and
developmental therapy. Behavioral modification ther-
apy has been found to be useful to control head-bang-
ing, hyperactivity, and other behavioral problems that
emerge during later childhood.
Prognosis
Individuals with cri du chat have a 10% mortality
during infancy due to complications associated with
congenital heart defects, hypotonia, and feeding diffi-
culties. Once these problems are controlled, most indi-
viduals with cri du chat syndrome have a normal
lifespan. The degree of mental retardation can be
KEY TERMS
Amniocentesis— A procedure performed at 16–18
weeks of pregnancy in which a needle is inserted
through a woman’s abdomen into her uterus to
draw out a small sample of the amniotic fluid
from around the baby. Either the fluid itself or
cells from the fluid can be used for a variety of
tests to obtain information about genetic disorders
and other medical conditions in the fetus.
Centromere— The centromere is the constricted
region of a chromosome. It performs certain func-
tions during cell division.
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)— A procedure
used for prenatal diagnosis at 10–12 weeks gesta-
tion. Under ultrasound guidance a needle is
inserted either through the mother’s vagina or
abdominal wall and a sample of cells is collected
from around the early embryo. These cells are then
tested for chromosome abnormalities or other
genetic diseases.
Chromosome— A microscopic thread-like struc-
ture found within each cell of the body and consists
of a complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have
46 chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes
in either the total number of chromosomes or their
shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or
mental abnormalities.
Congenital— Refers to a disorder that is present at
birth.
Deletion— The absence of genetic material that
is normally found in a chromosome. Often,
the genetic material is missing due to an error in
replication of an egg or sperm cell.
Hypotonia— Reduced or diminished muscle tone.
Karyotyping— A laboratory procedure in which
chromosomes are separated from cells, stained
and arranged so that their structure can be studied
under the microscope.
Microcephaly— An abnormally small head.
Cri du chat syndrome
severe. However, a recent study suggested that the
severity is somewhat affected by the amount of ther-
apy received.
Resources
BOOKS
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD, editors.
‘‘Chromosomal Abnormalities.’’ Section 19, Chapter
261 InThe Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research
Laboratories, 2004.
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD., editors.
‘‘Developmental Problems.’’ Section 19, Chapter 262 In
The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research
Laboratories, 2004.
PERIODICALS
Chen, Harold, MD. ‘‘Cri-du-chat Syndrome.’’eMedicine
November 21, 2002. <http://emedicine.com/ped/
topic504.htm>.
Israely, I., R. M. Costa, C. W. Xie, et al. ‘‘Deletion
of the Neuron-Specific Protein Delta-Catenin
Leads to Severe Cognitive and Synaptic
Dysfunction.’’ Current Biology14
(September 21, 2004): 1657–1663.
Van Buggenhout, G. J. C. M., et al. ‘‘Cri du Chat
Syndrome: Changing Phenotype in Older Patients.’’
American Journal of Medical Genetics90 (2000):
203–215.
ORGANIZATIONS
5p- Society. 7108 Katella Ave. #502, Stanton, CA 90680.
(888) 970-0777. <http://www.fivepminus.org>.
Alliance of Genetic Support Groups. 4301 Connecticut Ave.
NW, Suite 404, Washington, DC 20008. (202) 966-5557.
Fax: (202) 966-8553. <http://
www.geneticalliance.org>.
Cri du Chat Society. Dept. of Human Genetics, Box 33,
MCV Station, Richmond VA 23298. (804) 786-9632.
Cri du Chat Syndrome Support Group. <http://
www.cridchat.u-net.com>.
National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). 55
Kenosia Avenue, P. O. Box 1968, Danbury, CT
06813-1968. (203) 744-0100. Fax: (203) 798-2291.
<http://www.rarediseases.org>.
OTHER
OMIM—Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.<http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/>.
Holly Ann Ishmael, M.S.
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Crib death see Sudden infant death
syndrome
Crohn’s disease
Definition
Crohn’s disease is a type of inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD), resulting in swelling and dysfunction of
the intestinal tract.
Description
Crohn’s disease involves inflammation of the
intestine, especially the small intestine. Inflammation
refers to swelling, redness, and loss of normal func-
tion. There is evidence that the inflammation is caused
by various products of the immune system that attack
the body itself instead of helpfully attacking a foreign
invader (a virus or bacteria, for example). The inflam-
mation of Crohn’s disease most commonly affects the
last part of the ileum (a section of the small intestine),
and often includes the large intestine (the colon).
However, inflammation may also occur in other
areas of the gastrointestinal tract, affecting the
mouth, esophagus, or stomach. Crohn’s disease differs
from ulcerative colitis, the other major type of IBD, in
two important ways:
/C15The inflammation of Crohn’s disease may be discon-
tinuous, meaning that areas of involvement in the
intestine may be separated by normal, unaffected
segments of intestine. The affected areas are called
‘‘regional enteritis,’’ while the normal areas are called
‘‘skip areas.’’
/C15The inflammation of Crohn’s disease affects all the
layers of the intestinal wall, while ulcerative colitis
affects only the lining of the intestine.
Also, ulcerative colitis does not usually involve the
small intestine; in rare cases, it involves the terminal
ileum (so-called ‘‘backwash’’ ileitis).
In addition to inflammation, Crohn’s disease
causes ulcerations, or irritated pits in the intestinal
wall. These pits occur because the inflammation has
made areas of tissue shed.
Crohn’s disease may be diagnosed at any age,
although most diagnoses are made between the ages
15 to 35. About 0.02–0.04% of the population suffers
from this disorder, with men and women having an
equal chance of being stricken. Whites are more fre-
quently affected than other racial groups, and people
of Jewish origin are between three and six times more
likely to suffer from IBD. IBD runs in families; an IBD
patient has a 20% chance of having other relatives
who are fellow sufferers.
1058 Crohn’s disease
Crohn’s disease is a chronic disorder. While the
symptoms can be improved, a patient will not be com-
pletely cured of the underlying disease.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of Crohn’s disease is unknown. No
infectious agent (virus, bacteria, or fungi) has been
identified as the cause of Crohn’s disease. Still, some
researchers have theorized that some type of infection
may have originally been responsible for triggering the
immune system, resulting in the continuing and out-
of-control cycle of inflammation that occurs in
Crohn’s disease. Other evidence for a disorder of the
immune system includes the high incidence of other
immune disorders that may occur along with Crohn’s
disease.
The first symptoms of Crohn’s disease include
diarrhea, fever, abdominal pain, inability to eat,
weight loss, and fatigue. Some patients have severe
pain that mimicsappendicitis. It is rare, however, for
patients to notice blood in their bowel movements.
Because Crohn’s disease severely limits the ability of
the affected intestine to absorb the nutrients from
food, a patient with Crohn’s disease can have signs
of malnutrition, depending on the amount of intestine
affected and the duration of the disease.
The combination of severe inflammation, ulcera-
tion, and scarring that occurs in Crohn’s disease can
result in serious complications, including obstruction,
abscess formation, andfistula formation.
An obstruction is a blockage in the intestine. This
obstruction prevents the intestinal contents from pas-
sing beyond the point of the blockage. The intestinal
contents ‘‘back up,’’ resulting inconstipation, vomit-
ing, and intense pain. Although rare in Crohn’s dis-
ease (because of the increased thickness of the
intestinal wall due to swelling and scarring), a severe
bowel obstruction can result in an intestinal wall
perforation (a hole in the intestine). Such a hole in
the intestinal wall would allow the intestinal
contents, usually containing bacteria, to enter the
abdomen. This complication could result in a severe,
life-threatening infection.
Abcess formation is the development of a walled-
off pocket of infection. A patient with an abscess will
have bouts offever, increased abdominal pain, and
may have a lump or mass that can be felt through the
wall of the abdomen.
Fistula formation is the formation of abnormal
channels. These channels may connect one area of the
intestine to another neighboring section of intestine.
Fistulas may join an area of the intestine to the vagina
or bladder, or they may drain an area of the intestine
through the skin. Abscesses and fistulas commonly
affect the area around the anus and rectum (the very
last portions of the colon allowing waste to leave the
body). These abnormal connections allow the bacteria
that normally live in the intestine to enter other areas
of the body, causing potentially serious infections.
Patients suffering from Crohn’s disease also have
a significant chance of experiencing other disorders.
Some of these may relate specifically to the intestinal
disease, and others appear to have some relationship
to the imbalanced immune system. The faulty absorp-
tion state of the bowel can result ingallstones and
kidney stones. Inflamed areas in the abdomen may
press on the tube that drains urine from the kidney
to the bladder (the ureter). Ureter compression can
make urine back up into the kidney, enlarge the ureter
and kidney, and can potentially lead to kidney
damage. Patients with Crohn’s disease also frequently
suffer from:
/C15arthritis (inflammation of the joints)
/C15spondylitis (inflammation of the vertebrae, the bones
of the spine)
/C15ulcers of the mouth and skin
/C15painful, red bumps on the skin
/C15inflammation of several eye areas
/C15inflammation of the liver, gallbladder, and/or the
channels (ducts) that carry bile between and within
the liver, gallbladder, and intestine
The chance of developingcancer of the intestine is
greater than normal among patients with Crohn’s dis-
ease, although this chance is not as high as among
those patients with ulcerative colitis.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is first suspected based on a patient’s
symptoms. Blood tests may reveal an increase in
certain types of white blood cells, an indication that
some type of inflammation is occurring in the body.
The blood tests may also reveal anemia and other signs
of malnutrition due to malabsorption (low blood pro-
tein; variations in the amount of calcium, potassium,
and magnesium present in the blood; changes in
certain markers of liver function). Stool samples may
be examined to make sure that no infectious agent is
causing thediarrhea, and to see if the waste contains
blood.
During an endoscopic exam, a doctor passes a
flexible tube with a tiny, fiber-optic camera device
Crohn’s disease
through the rectum and into the colon. The doctor can
then carefully examine the lining of the intestine for
signs of inflammation and ulceration that might
suggest Crohn’s disease. A tiny sample (a biopsy) of
the intestine can also be taken through the endoscope,
and the tissue will be examined under a microscope for
evidence of Crohn’s disease.
X rays can be helpful for diagnosis, and also for
determining how much of the intestine is involved in
the disease. For these x rays, the patient must either
drink a chalky solution containing barium, or receive a
barium enema(a solution that is administered through
the rectum). Barium helps to ‘‘light up’’ the intestine,
allowing more detail to be seen on the resulting x rays.
While Crohn’s disease and ulcerative colitis are
similar, they are also very different. Although it can
be difficult to determine whether a patient has Crohn’s
disease or ulcerative colitis, it is important to make
every effort to distinguish between these two diseases.
Because the long-term complications of the diseases
are different, treatment will depend on careful diag-
nosis of the specific IBD present.
Treatment
Treatments for Crohn’s disease try to reduce the
underlying inflammation, the resulting malabsorp-
tion/malnutrition, the uncomfortable symptoms of
crampy abdominal pain and diarrhea, and the possible
complications (obstructions, abscesses, and fistulas).
Inflammation can be treated with a drug called
sulfasalazine. Sulfasalazine is made up of two parts.
One part is related to the sulfaantibiotics; the other
part is a form of the anti-inflammatory chemical,
salicylic acid (related toaspirin). Sulfasalazine is not
well absorbed from the intestine, so it stays mostly
within the intestine, where it is broken down into its
components. It is believed that the salicylic acid com-
ponent actively treats Crohn’s disease by fighting
inflammation. Some patients do not respond to sul-
fasalazine, and require steroid medications (such as
prednisone). Steroids, however, must be used care-
fully to avoid the complications of these drugs,
including increased risk of infection and weakening
of bones (osteoporosis). Some very potent immuno-
suppressive drugs, which interfere with the products
of the immune system and can hopefully decrease
inflammation, may be used for those patients who
do not improve on steroids.
A new drug called infliximab (Remicade) appears
to be a powerful treatment for Crohn’s disease, particu-
larly for patients who have not responded well to other
forms of treatment. Infliximab is administered through
infusion, and consists of a monoclonal antibody that
interferes with the inflammatory process mediated by
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-a). Patients taking
infliximab seem to be able to decrease their use of steroid
medications, and require fewer surgical interventions.
Furthermore, infliximab is the first medication
approved for treating fistulas. Unfortunately, inflixi-
mab can only be used on a short-term basis, because
i t si n t e r f e r e n c ew i t hT N F - aa c t i v i t yc a na l s op r e d i s p o s e
patients to serious infection. More research is needed to
try to harness the benefits of infliximab, while avoiding
the potential complications.
Serious cases of malabsorption/malnutrition may
need to be treated by providing nutritional supple-
ments. These supplements must be in a form that can
be absorbed from the damaged, inflamed intestine.
Some patients find that certain foods are hard to
digest, including milk, large quantities of fiber, and
A barium x-ray showing the colon of a patient with Crohn’s
disease where the large and small intestines join (bottom
left). (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
1060 Crohn’s disease
spicy foods. When patients are suffering from an
obstruction, or during periods of time when symptoms
of the disease are at their worst, they may need to
drink specially formulated, high-calorie liquid supple-
ments. Those patients who are severely ill may need to
receive their nutrition through a needle inserted in a
vein (intravenously), or even by a tiny tube (a catheter)
inserted directly into a major vein in the chest.
A number of medications are available to help
decrease the cramping and pain associated with
Crohn’s disease. These include loperamide, tincture
of opium, and codeine. Some fiber preparations
(methylcellulose or psyllium) may be helpful, although
some patients do not tolerate them well.
The first step in treating an obstruction involves
general attempts to decrease inflammation with
sulfasalazine, steroids, or immunosuppressive drugs.
A patient with a severe obstruction will have to stop
taking all food and drink by mouth, allowing the bowel
to ‘‘rest.’’ Abscesses and other infections will require
antibiotics. Surgery may be required to repair an
obstruction that does not resolve on its own, to remove
an abscess, or to repair a fistula. Such surgery may
involve the removal of a section of the intestine. In
extremely severe cases of Crohn’s disease that do not
respond to treatment, a patient may need to have the
entire large intestine removed (an operation called a
colectomy). In this case, a piece of the remaining small
intestine is pulled through an opening in the abdomen.
This bit of intestine is fashioned surgically to allow a
special bag to be placed over it. This bag catches the
body’s waste, which no longer can be passed through
the large intestine and out of the anus. This open-
ing, which will remain in place for life, is called an
ileostomy.
Prognosis
Crohn’s disease is a life-long illness. The severity
of the disease can vary, and a patient can experience
periods of time when the disease is not active and he or
she is symptom free. However, the complications and
risks of Crohn’s disease tend to increase over time.
Well over 60% of all patients with Crohn’s disease
will require surgery, and about half of these patients
will require more than one operation over time. About
5–10% of all Crohn’s patients will die of their disease,
primarily due to massive infection.
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
Cromolyn see Antiasthmatic drugs
Cross-eye see Strabismus
Cross-gender identification see Gender
identity disorder
Croup
Definition
Croup is a common childhood ailment. Typically,
it arises from a viral infection of the larynx (voice box)
and is associated with mild upper respiratory symp-
toms such as a runny nose andcough. The key symp-
tom is a harsh barking cough. Croup is usually not
KEY TERMS
Abscess— A walled-off pocket of pus caused by
infection.
Endoscope— A medical instrument that can be
passed into an area of the body (the bladder or intes-
tine, for example) to allow examination of that area.
The endoscope usually has a fiber-optic camera that
allows a greatly magnified image to be shown on a
television screen viewed by the operator. Many
endoscopes also allow the operator to retrieve a
small sample (biopsy) of the area being examined,
to more closely view the tissue under a microscope.
Fistule— An abnormal channel that creates an open
passageway between two structures that do not
normally connect.
Gastrointestinal tract— The entire length of the
digestive system, running from the stomach,
through the small intestine, large intestine, and
out the rectum and anus.
Immune system— The body system responsible for
producing various cells and chemicals that fight
infection by viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other for-
eign invaders. In autoimmune disease, these cells
and chemicals turn against the body itself.
Inflammation— The result of the body’s attempts to
fight off and wall off an area that is infected.
Inflammation results in the classic signs of redness,
heat, swelling, and loss of function.
Obstruction— A blockage.
Ulceration— A pitted area or break in the continu-
ity of a surface such as skin or mucous membrane.
Croup
serious and most children recover within a few days. In
a small percentage of cases, a child develops breathing
difficulties and may need medical attention.
Description
At one time, the term croup was primarily asso-
ciated with diphtheria, a life-threatening respiratory
infection. Owing to widespread vaccinations,
diphtheria has become rare in the United States, and
croup currently refers to a mild viral infection of the
larynx. Croup is also known as laryngotracheitis, a
medical term that describes the inflammation of the
trachea (windpipe) and larynx.
Parainfluenza viruses are the typical root cause of
the infection, butinfluenza (flu) and cold viruses may
sometimes be responsible. All of these viruses are highly
contagious and easily transmitted between individuals
via sneezing and coughing. Children between the ages of
three months and six years are usually affected, with the
greatest incidence at one to two years of age. Croup can
occur at any time of the year, but it is most typical
during early autumn and winter. The characteristic
harsh barking of a croupy cough can be very distressing,
but it rarely indicates a serious problem. Most children
with croup can be treated very effectively at home;
however, 1–5% may require medical treatment.
Croup may sometimes be confused with more
serious conditions, such asepiglottitis or bacterial tra-
cheitis. These ailments arise from bacterial infection
and must receive medical treatment.
Causes and symptoms
The larynx and trachea may become inflamed or
swollen from an upper respiratory viral infection. The
hallmark sign of croup is a harsh, barking cough. This
cough may be preceded by one to three days of symp-
toms that resemble a slight cold. A croupy cough is
often accompanied by a runny nose, hoarseness, and a
low fever. When the child inhales, there may be a raspy
or high-pitched noise, calledstridor, owing to the nar-
rowed airway and accumulated mucus. In the presence
of stridor, medical attention is required.
However, the airway rarely narrows so much that
breathing is impeded. Symptoms usually go away
completely within a few days. Medical treatment may
be sought if the child’s symptoms do not respond to
home treatment.
Emergency medical treatment is required immedi-
ately if the child has difficulty breathing, swallowing,
or talking; develops a high fever (103
/C14F/39.4 /C14Co r
more); seems unalert or confused; or has pale or
blue-tinged skin.
Diagnosis
Croup is diagnosed based on the symptoms. If
symptoms are particularly severe, or do not respond
to treatment, an x ray of the throat area is done to
assess the possibility of epiglottitis or other blockage
of the airway.
Treatment
Home treatment is the usual method of managing
croup symptoms. It is important that the child is kept
comfortable and calm to the best degree possible,
because crying can make symptoms seem worse.
Humid air can help a child with croup feel more com-
fortable. Recommended methods include sitting in a
steamy bathroom with the hot water running or using
a cool-water vaporizer or humidifier. However,
research in 2004 found that although cool-mist
therapy at home or in the hospital may add to the
child’s comfort, it does little to treat the actual
condition. The child should drink frequently in order
to stay well hydrated. To treat any fever, the child may
be given an appropriate dose ofacetaminophen (like
Tylenol). Antihistamines and decongestants are ineffec-
tive in treating croup.All children under the age of 18
should not be given aspirin, as it may causeReye’s
syndrome, a life-threatening disease of the brain.
If the child does not respond to home treatment,
medical treatment at a doctor’s office or an emergency
room could be necessary. Based on the severity of
symptoms and the response to treatment, the child
may need to be admitted to a hospital.
For immediate symptom relief, epinephrine may be
administered as an inhaled aerosol. Effects last for up to
two hours, but there is a possibility that symptoms
may return. For that reason, the child is kept under
supervision for three or more hours. Steroids (corticos-
teroids) such as prednisone may be used to treat croup,
particularly if the child has stridor when resting.
Of the 1–5% of children requiring medical treat-
ment, approximately 1% need respiratory support.
Such support involves intubation (inserting a tube
into the trachea) and oxygen administration.
Alternative treatment
Botanical/herbal medicines can be helpful in heal-
ing the cough that is commonly associated with croup.
Several herbs to consider for cough treatment include
aniseed ( Pimpinella anisum ), sundew ( Drosera
1062 Croup
rotundifolia), thyme ( Thymus vulgaris ), and wild
cherry bark (Prunus serotina). Homeopathic medicine
can be very effective in treating cases of croup.
Choosing the correct remedy (a common choice is
aconite or monkshood,Aconitum napellus) is always
the key to the success of this type of treatment.
Prognosis
Croup is a temporary condition and children typi-
cally recover completely within three to six days.
Children can experience one or more episodes of
croup during early childhood; however, croup is rarely
a dangerous condition.
Prevention
Croup is caused by highly transmissible viruses
and is often difficult to impossible to prevent.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Kirn, Timothy F. ‘‘Cool Mist Therapy is Losing Credibility
for Croup: Steroids or Even Epinephrine May Be
Needed.’’ Pediatric NewsMarch 2004: 10–11.
Julia Barrett
Teresa G. Odle
Cryoglobulin test
Definition
Cryoglobulin is an abnormal blood protein asso-
ciated with several diseases. Testing for cryoglobulin
is done when a person has symptoms of this protein
or is being evaluated for one of the associated
diseases.
Purpose
Cryoglobulin clumps in cold temperatures. This
physical characteristic causes people with cryoglobu-
lin to have symptoms during cold weather: blanching,
numbness,a n dpain in their fingers or toes (Raynaud’s
phenomenon); bleeding into the skin (purpura); and
pain in joints (arthralgia). People with these symptoms
or any other symptoms that appear in cold weather
should be tested for cryoglobulin.
Diseases that cause the body to make extra or
abnormal proteins are often associated with cryoglo-
bulin. These diseases include cancers involving white
blood cells, infections, autoimmune disorders,a n d
rheumatoid diseases.
This test provides information about the cause of
symptoms in a person who already has a disease pro-
cess. It does not diagnose a specific disease or monitor
the course of a disease.
Precautions
This test is not a screening test for disease in a
person without symptoms.
Description
Laboratory testing for cryoglobulin is based on
the fact that cryoglobulin clumps when cooled and
dissolves when warmed. The test is done on a person’s
serum (the yellow liquid part of blood that separates
from the cells after theblood clots). The serum is kept
warm from the time drawn until the cells and the
serum are separated in the laboratory. The serum is
placed at 33.8
/C14F( 1/C14C) for one to seven days. If there
is clumping, cryoglobulins are present. The amount
of cryoglobulins is determined by measuring the
amount of clumping. Negative tests are checked
through seven days.
Additional testing is done to find out what kind of
cryoglobulin protein is present. There are three kinds
of cryoglobulin, each associated with different
diseases.
KEY TERMS
Diphtheria— A serious, frequently fatal, bacterial
infection that affects the respiratory tract.
Vaccinations given in childhood have made
diphtheria very rare in the United States.
Epiglottitis— A bacterial infection that affects the
epiglottis. The epiglottis is a flap of tissue that prevents
food and fluid from entering the trachea. The infec-
t i o nc a u s e si tt ob e c o m es w ollen, potentially blocking
the airway. Other symptoms include a high fever,
nonbarking cough, muffled voice, and an inability
to swallow properly (possibly indicated by drooling).
Glucocorticoid— A hormone that helps in diges-
tion of carbohydrates and reduces inflammation.
Larynx— Commonly called the voice box, it is the
area of the trachea that contains the vocal cords.
Stridor— The medical term used to describe the high-
pitched or rasping noise made when air is inhaled.
Trachea— Commonly called the windpipe, it is the
air pathway that connects the nose and mouth to
the lungs.
Cryoglobulin test