DISEASE: Gastroenteritis
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

pressure to the skin. Blistering often appears in
infancy in response to simply being held or handled.
In rarer forms of the disorder, EB can be life-threa-
tening. There is no cure for the disorder. Treatment
focuses on preventing and treating wounds and
infection.
Description
Epidermolysis bullosa has three major forms and
at least 16 subtypes. The three major forms are EB
simplex, junctional EB, and dystrophic EB. These
can range in severity from mild blistering to more
disfiguring and life-threatening disease. Physicians
diagnose the form of the disease based on where the
blister forms in relation to the epidermis (the skin’s
outermost layer) and the deeper dermis layer.
The prevalence of epidermolysis varies among
different populations. A study in Scotland estimated
the prevalence to be one in 20,400. Researchers in
other parts of the world estimate the prevalence to be
one in 100,000. This variance is due to the variability
of expression. Many cases of epidermolysis bullosa are
often not accurately diagnosed and thus, are not
reported.
Causes and symptoms
EB can be inherited as the result of a dominant
genetic abnormality (only one parent carries the
abnormal gene) or a recessive genetic abnormality
(both parents carry the abnormal gene).
EB simplex results from mutations in genes
responsible for keratin 5 and 14, which are proteins
that give cells of the epidermis its structure. EB
simplex is transmitted in an autosomal dominant
fashion.
Dystrophic EB is caused by mutations in genes for
type VII collagen, the protein contained in the fibers
anchoring the epidermis to the deeper layers of the
skin. The genetic mutations for junctional EB are
found in the genes responsible for producing the
protein Laminin-5. Dystrophic EB is an autosomal
disorder and will only result if both parents transmit
an abnormal gene during conception.
EB simplex, the most common form of EB, is the
least serious form of the disease. In most affected
individuals, the blisters are mild and do not scar after
they heal. Some forms of EB simplex affect just the
hands and feet. Other forms of EB simplex can lead to
more widespread blistering, as well as hair loss and
missing teeth. Recurrent blistering is annoying but not
life threatening.
The second, or junctional, form of EB does not
lead to scarring. However, skin on the areas prone to
blistering, such as elbows and knees, often shrinks. In
one variation of junctional EB, called gravis junctional
EB of Herlitz, the blistering can be so severe that
affected infants may not survive due to massive
infection anddehydration.
The third form of EB, dystrophic EB, varies
greatly in terms of severity, but more typically affects
the arms and legs. In one variation, called Hallopeau-
Siemens EB, repeated blistering and scarring of the
hands and feet causes the fingers and toes to fuse,
leaving them dysfunctional and with a mitten-like
appearance.
Diagnosis
Physicians and researchers distinguish between
the three major subtypes of EB based on which layer
of the epidermis separates from the deeper dermis
layer of the skin below. Patients suspected of having
EB should have a fresh blister biopsied for review.
This sample of tissue is examined under an electron
microscope or under a conventional microscope using
a technique called immunofluorescence, which helps
to map the underlying structure.
Knowing that a family member has EB can help
establish the diagnosis, but it is possible that parents
or siblings will show no sign of the disease, either
because it is caused by a new genetic mutation, or
because the parents are carriers of the recessive trait
and do not display the disease.
Treatment
The most important treatment for EB is daily
wound care. Because the skin is very fragile, care
must be taken to be certain that dressing changes do
not cause further damage. Tape should not be applied
directly to skin and bandages should be soaked off.
KEY TERMS
Collagen— The main supportive protein of carti-
lage, connective tissue, tendon, skin, and bone.
Dermis— The layer of skin beneath the epidermis.
Epidermis— The outermost layer of the skin.
Keratin— A tough, nonwater-soluble protein found
in the nails, hair, and the outermost layer of skin.
Human hair is made up largely of keratin.
Epidermolysis bullosa
Infection is a major concern, so a topical antibiotic,
such as bacitracin, mupirocin, or sulfadiazine, should
be routinely applied. Among persons with recessive
dystrophic EB, the anticonvulsant phenytoin is some-
times effective because it decreases production of an
enzyme that breaks down collagen.
Prognosis
The prognosis of EB varies depending on the
subtype of the disease. Individuals with EB simplex
can live long, fulfilling lives. The severity of the junc-
tional and dystrophic forms of EB can vary greatly.
Infants affected with some forms of the disease often
do not survive infancy; other forms can lead to severe
scarring and disfigurement.
Resources
BOOKS
Fine, Jo-David, et al.Epidermolysis Bullosa:
Clinical,Epidemiologic, and Laboratory Advances, and
the Findings of the National Epidermolysis Bullosa
Registry. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ Press,
1999.
Fitzpatrick, Thomas B., Richard A. Johnson, Wolff Klaus,
and Dick Suurmond.Color Atlas and Synopsis of
Clinical Dermatology.4th ed. NewYork: McGraw-Hill,
2000.
Mallory, S.B.Atlas of Pediatric Dermatology.Pearl River,
NY: Parthenon, 2001.
PERIODICALS
Cotell, S., N. D. Robinson, and L. S. Chan.
‘‘AutoimmuneBlistering Skin Diseases.’’American
Journal of Emerging Medicine18, no. 3 (2000): 288–99.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Dermatology. PO Box 4014, 930 N.
Meacham Rd., Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014. (847) 330-
0230. Fax: (847) 330-0050. <http://www.aad.org>.
OTHER
Dermatology Online Atlas. <http://www.dermis.net/doia/
diagnose.asp?zugr=d&lang=e&diagnr=757320
&topic=t>.
Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa Research Association
International. <http://debra-international.org/
index1.htm>.
Epidermolysis Bullosa Medical Research Foundation.
<http://www.med.stanford.edu/school/dermatology/
ebmrf/>.
Oregon Health Sciences University. <http://
www.ohsu.edu/cliniweb/C17/C17.800.865.410.html>.
University of Iowa College of Medicine. <http://
tray.dermatology.uiowa.edu/EBA-001.htm>.
L. Fleming Fallon, Jr., MD, PhD, DrPH
Epididymitis
Definition
Epididymitis is inflammation or infection of the
epididymis. In this long coiled tube attached to the
upper part of each testicle, sperm mature and are
stored before ejaculation.
Description
Epididymitis is the most common cause ofpain in
the scrotum. The acute form is usually associated with
the most severe pain and swelling. If symptoms last for
more than six weeks after treatment begins, the con-
dition is considered chronic.
Epididymitis can occur any time after the onset of
puberty but is most common between the ages of 18
and 40. It is especially common among members of the
military who exercise for extended periods without
emptying their bladders.
Factors that increase the risk of developing epidi-
dymitis include:
/C15infection of the bladder, kidney, prostate, or urinary
tract
/C15other recent illness
/C15narrowing of the urethra (the tube that drains urine
from the bladder)
/C15use of a urethral catheter
Causes and symptoms
Although epididymitis can be caused by the same
organisms that cause some sexually transmitted
diseases (STDs) or occur after prostate surgery, the
condition is generally due to pus-generating bacteria
associated with infections in other parts of the body.
Epididymitis can also be caused by injury or infec-
tion of the scrotum or by irritation from urine that has
accumulated in the vas deferens (the duct through
which sperm travels after leaving the epididymis).
Epididymitis is characterized by sudden redness
and swelling of the scrotum. The affected testicle is
hard and sore, and the other testicle may feel tender.
The patient has chills and fever and usually has acute
urethritis (inflammation of the urethra).
Enlarged lymph nodes in the groin cause scrotal
pain that intensifies throughout the day and may
become so severe that walking normally becomes
impossible.
1352 Epididymitis
Diagnosis
Laboratory tests used to diagnose epididymitis
include:
/C15urinalysis and urine culture
/C15examination of discharges from the urethra and
prostate gland
/C15blood tests to measure white-cell counts
Treatment
Because epididymitis that affects both testicles
can make a man sterile, antibiotic therapy must be
initiated as soon as symptoms appear. To prevent
reinfection, medication must be taken exactly as pre-
scribed, even if the patient’s symptoms disappear or he
begins to feel better. Over-the-counter anti-inflamma-
tories can relieve pain but should not be used without
the approval of a family physician or urologist.
Bed rest is recommended until symptoms subside,
and patients are advised to wear athletic supporters
when they resume normal activities. If pain is severe, a
local anesthetic like lidocaine (Xylocaine) may be
injected directly into the spermatic cord.
Self-care
A patient who has epididymitis should not drink
beverages that containcaffeine. To preventconstipa-
tion, he should use stool softeners or eat plenty of fruit,
nuts, whole grain cereals, and other foods with laxa-
tive properties.
An ice bag wrapped in a towel can reduce pain and
swelling but should be removed from the inflamed
area for a few minutes every hour to preventburns.
Strenuous activity should be avoided until symp-
toms disappear. Sexual activity should not be resumed
until a month after symptoms disappear.
If a second course of treatment doesn’t eradicate
stubborn symptoms, longterm anti-inflammatory
therapy may be recommended. In rare instances,
chronic symptoms require surgery.
Surgery
Each of the surgical procedures used to treat
epididymitis is performed under local anesthesia on
an outpatient basis. Both of them cause sterility.
Epididymectomy involves removing the inflamed
section of the epididymitis through a small incision in
the scrotum.
Bilateral vasectomy prevents fluid and sperm from
passing through the epididymis. This procedure is
usually performed on men who have chronic epididy-
mitis or on elderly patients undergoing prostate
surgery.
Prognosis
Pain generally subsides 24–72 hours after treat-
ment begins. Complete healing may take weeks or
months.
Prevention
Using condoms and not having sex with anyone
who has an STD can prevent some cases of
epididymitis.
Resources
OTHER
‘‘Epididymitis.’’ Digital Urology Journal.June 7, 1998.
<http://www.duj.com/epididymitis.html>.
Maureen Haggerty
Epidural abscess see Central nervous system
infections
Epidural anesthetic see Anesthesia, local
Epiglottitis
Definition
Epiglottitis is an infection of the epiglottis, which
can lead to severe airway obstruction.
Description
When air is inhaled (inspired), it passes through
the nose and the nasopharynx or through the mouth
and the oropharynx. These are both connected to the
larynx, a tube made of cartilage. The air continues
down the larynx to the trachea. The trachea then splits
into two branches, the left and right bronchi (bron-
chial tubes). These bronchi branch into smaller air
tubes that run within the lungs, leading to the small
air sacs of the lungs (alveoli).
Either food, liquid, or air may be taken in through
the mouth. While air goes into the larynx and the
respiratory system, food and liquid are directed into
the tube leading to the stomach, the esophagus.
Epiglottitis
Because food or liquid in the bronchial tubes or lungs
could cause a blockage or lead to an infection, the
airway is protected. The epiglottis is a leaf-like piece
of cartilage extending upwards from the larynx. The
epiglottis can close down over the larynx when some-
one is eating or drinking, preventing these food and
liquids from entering the airway.
Epiglottitis is an infection and inflammation of
the epiglottis. Because the epiglottis may swell consid-
erably, there is a danger that the airway will be blocked
off by the very structure designed to protect it. Air is
then unable to reach the lungs. Without intervention,
epiglottitis has the potential to be fatal.
Epiglottitis is primarily a disease of two to seven-
year-old children, although older children and adults
can also contract it. Boys are twice as likely as girls to
develop this infection. Because epiglottitis involves
swelling and infection of tissues, which are all located
at or above the level of the epiglottis, it is sometimes
referred to as supraglottitis (supra, meaning above).
About 25% of all children with this infection also have
pneumonia.
Causes and symptoms
The most common cause of epiglottitis is infection
with the bacteria calledHaemophilus influenzae type b.
Other types of bacteria are also occasionally respon-
sible for this infection, including some types of
Streptococcus bacteria and the bacteria responsible
for causingdiphtheria.
A patient with epiglottitis typically experiences a
sudden fever, and begins having severe throat and
neck pain. Because the swollen epiglottis interferes
significantly with air movement, every breath creates
a loud, harsh, high-pitched sound referred to as
stridor. Because the vocal cords are located in the
larynx just below the area of the epiglottis, the
swollen epiglottis makes the patient’s voice sound
muffled and strained. Swallowing becomes difficult,
and the patient may drool. The patient often leans
forward and juts out his or her jaw, while struggling
for breath.
Epiglottitis strikes suddenly and progresses
quickly. A child may begin complaining of a sore
throat, and within a few hours be suffering from extre-
mely severe airway obstruction.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis begins with a high level of suspicion
that a quickly progressing illness with fever, sore
throat, and airway obstruction is very likely to be
epiglottitis. If epiglotti tis is suspected, no efforts
should be made to look at the throat, or to swab the
throat in order to obtain a culture for identification
of the causative organism. These maneuvers may
cause the larynx to go into spasm (laryngospasm),
completely closing the airway. These procedures
should only be performed in a fully-equipped operat-
ing room, so that if laryngospasm occurs, a breathing
tube can be immediately placed in order to keep the
airway open.
An instrument called a laryngoscope is often used
in the operating room to view the epiglottis, which will
appear cherry-red and quite swollen. An x-ray picture
taken from the side of the neck should also be
obtained. The swollen epiglottis has a characteristic
appearance, called the ‘‘thumb sign.’’
Treatment
Treatment almost always involves the immediate
establishment of an artificial airway: inserting a
breathing tube into the throat (intubation); or making
a tiny opening toward the base of the neck and putting
a breathing tube into the trachea (tracheostomy).
Because the patient’s apparent level of distress may
not match the actual severity of the situation, and
because the disease’s progression can be quite surpris-
ingly rapid, it is preferable to go ahead and place the
artificial airway, rather than adopting a wait-and-see
approach.
Because epiglottitis is caused by a bacteria,anti-
biotics such as cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or ampicillin
with sulbactam should be given through a needle
placed in a vein (intravenously). This prevents
the bacteria that are circulating throughout the blood-
stream from causing infection elsewhere in the body.
Prognosis
With treatment (including the establishment of an
artificial airway), only about 1% of children with
epiglottitis die. Without the artificial airway, this fig-
ure jumps to 6%. Most patients recover form the
infection, and can have the breathing tube removed
(extubation) within a few days.
Prevention
Prevention involves the use of a vaccine against
H. influenzae type b (called the Hib vaccine). It is
given to babies at two, four, six, and 15 months.
Use of this vaccine has made epiglottitis a very rare
occurrence.
1354 Epiglottitis
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, Inc. One Prince St., Alexandria VA 22314-
3357. (703) 836-4444. <http://www.entnet.org>.
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
Epilepsy see Seizure disorder
Epinephrine see Bronchodilators
Episiotomy
Definition
An episiotomy is a surgical incision made in the
area between the vagina and anus (perineum). This is
done during the last stages of labor and delivery to
expand the opening of the vagina to prevent tearing
during the delivery of the baby.
Purpose
This procedure is usually done during the delivery
or birthing process when the vaginal opening does not
stretch enough to allow the baby to be delivered with-
out tearing the surrounding tissue.
Precautions
Prior to the onset of labor, pregnant women may
want to discuss the use of episiotomy with their care
providers. It is possible that, with adequate prepara-
tion and if the stages of labor and delivery are mana-
ged with adequate coaching and support, the need for
an episiotomy may be reduced.
Description
An episiotomy is a surgical incision, usually made
with sterile scissors, in the perineum as the baby’s head
is being delivered. This procedure may be used if the
tissue around the vaginal opening begins tearing or
does not seem to be stretching enough to allow the
baby to be delivered.
In most cases, the physician makes a midline inci-
sion along a straight line from the lowest edge of the
vaginal opening to toward the anus. In other cases, the
episiotomy is performed by making a diagonal inci-
sion across the midline between the vagina and anus.
This method is used much less often, may be more
painful, and may require more healing time than the
midline incision. After the baby is delivered through
the extended vaginal opening, the incision is closed
with stitches. A local anesthetic agent may be applied
or injected to numb the area before it is sewn up
(sutured).
Several reasons are cited for performing episio-
tomies. Some experts believe that an episiotomy
speeds up the birthing process, making it easier for
the baby to be delivered. This can be important if there
is any sign of distress that may harm the mother or
baby. Because tissues in this area may tear during the
delivery, another reason for performing an episiotomy
is that a clean incision is easier to repair than a jagged
tear and may heal faster. Although the use of episiot-
omy is sometimes described as protecting the pelvic
muscles and possibly preventing future problems with
urinary incontinence, it is not clear that the procedure
actually helps.
The use of episiotomy during the birthing process
is fairly widespread in the United States. Estimates of
episiotomy use in hospitals range from 65–95% of
deliveries, depending on how many times the mother
KEY TERMS
Epiglottis— A leaf-like piece of cartilage extending
upwards from the larynx, which can close like a lid
over the trachea to prevent the airway from receiv-
ing any food or liquid being swallowed.
Extubation— Removal of a breathing tube.
Intubation— Putting a breathing tube into the
airway.
Laryngospasm— Spasm of the larynx.
Larynx— The part of the airway lying between the
pharynx and the trachea.
Nasopharynx— The part of the airway into which
the nose leads.
Oropharynx— The part of the airway into which
the mouth leads.
Supraglottitis— Another term for epiglottitis.
Trachea— The part of the airway that leads into the
bronchial tubes.
Tracheostomy— A procedure in which a small
opening is made in the neck and into the trachea.
A breathing tube is then placed through this
opening.
Episiotomy
has given birth previously. This routine use of episiot-
omy is being reexamined in many hospitals and
health care settings. However, an episiotomy is always
necessary during a forceps delivery because of the size
of the forceps.
Preparation
It may be possible to avoid the need for an
episiotomy. Pregnant women may want to talk with
their care providers about the use of episiotomy
during the delivery. Kegel exercises are often recom-
mended during thepregnancy to help strengthen the
pelvic floor muscles. Prenatal perineal massage may
help to stretch and relax the tissue around the vaginal
opening. During the delivery process, warm com-
presses can be applied to the area along with the use
of perineal massage. Coaching and support are also
important during the delivery process. A slowed,
controlled pushing during the second stage of labor
(when the mother gets the urge to push) may allow
the tissues to stretch rather than tear. Also, an upright
birthing position (rather than one where the mother is
lying down) may decrease the need for an episiotomy.
Aftercare
The area of the episiotomy may be uncomfortable
or even painful for several days. Several practices can
relieve some of thepain. Cold packs can be applied to
the perineal area to reduce swelling and discomfort.
Use of the Sitz bath available at the hospital or birth
center can ease the discomfort, too. This unit circu-
lates warm water over the area. A squirt bottle with
water can be used to clean the area after urination or
defecation rather than wiping with tissue. Also, the
area should be patted dry rather than wiped.
Cleansing pads soaked in witch hazel (such as Tucks)
are very effective for cleaning the area and also feel
soothing.
Risks
Several side effects of episiotomy have been
reported, including infection, increased pain, pro-
longed healing time, and increased discomfort once
sexual intercourse is resumed. There is also the risk
that the episiotomy incision will be deeper or longer
than is necessary to permit the birth of the infant.
There is a risk of increased bleeding.
Normal results
In a normal and well managed delivery, an episiot-
omy may be avoided altogether. If an episiotomy is
deemed to be necessary, a simple midline incision
will be made to extend the vaginal opening without
additional tearing or extensive trauma to the perineal
area. Although there may be some pain associated with
the healing of the episiotomy incision, relief can usually
Injecting local anesthetic Cutting the perineum Closing the incision
An episiotomy is a surgical incision made in the perineum, the area of tissue between the vaginal opening and the anus, during
the birthing process. This procedure may be used if the tissue around the vaginal opening begins to tear or is not stretching
enough to allow the baby to be delivered vaginally. In the United States, the rate of episiotomies being performed is estimated at
65–95%. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
1356 Episiotomy
be provided with mild pain relievers and supportive
measures, such as the application of cold packs.
Abnormal results
An episiotomy incision that is too long or deep
may extend into the rectum, causing more bleeding
and an increased risk of infection. Additional tearing
or tissue damage may occur beyond the episiotomy
incision, leaving a cut and a tear to be repaired.
Resources
OTHER
Childbirth.org. <http://www.childbirth.org>.
Altha Roberts Edgren
Epispadias see Hypospadias and epispadias
Epistaxis see Nosebleed
EPS see Electrophysiology study of the heart
Epstein-Barr virus test
Definition
The Epstein-Barr virus test is a blood test, or
group of tests, to determine the presence or absence
of antibodies in the blood stream directed against
proteins of the Epstein-Barr virus, the cause of
infectious mononucleosis.
Purpose
The test is primarily used to detect whether first
time infection (called primary infection) with the
Epstein-Barr virus is currently occurring, or has
occurred within a short period of time. The pattern
of the antibodies detected can, however, tell if the
person has never been infected with the Epstein-Barr
virus, or if the infection occurred in the more distant
past. These tests are mostly utilized in the diagnosis of
Epstein-Barr virus-associated infectious mononucleo-
sis when the more common diagnostic test, the hetero-
phile antibody, is negative, or in situations where the
infection is manifesting unusual symptoms. Therefore,
the tests are often not needed in a situation where a
doctor believes that a person has mononucleosis and
the heterophile test (also called the monospot test) is
positive.
In addition, Epstein-Barr virus testing is usually
not needed in the evaluation of a patient who has
long-lasting fatigue, and may have thechronic fatigue
syndrome. Initially, it was thought that discovering a
particular pattern of antibodies to this virus was
helpful in the diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndrome,
but this no longer appears to be the case.
Precautions
As in any blood test, standard precautions should
be performed to prevent infection at the site where the
blood is obtained, and to prevent excess bleeding.
Normally, the site is cleaned with an antiseptic
liquid prior to the blood being obtained; a sterile
non-reusable needle and syringe are used; and, once
the needle is removed, pressure is placed at the site
until bleeding has stopped.
Description
These tests are more often performed in a consult-
ing laboratory than at a physician’s office or in a
hospital laboratory. Like most antibody tests, they
are performed on serum, the liquid part of the blood
obtained after the whole blood is allowed to clot in
a tube. Antibodies can be detected against several
components of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). These
components are the EBV early antigen (EA), the viral
capsid antigen (VCA), and the nuclear antigen
(EBNA). These several antigens are different proteins
that are produced in the process (stages) of the virus’
growth.
KEY TERMS
Kegel exercises— A series of contractions and
relaxations of the muscles in the perineal area.
These exercises are thought to strengthen the pelvic
floor and may help prevent urinary incontinence in
women.
Perineum— The area between the opening of the
vagina and the anus in a woman, or the area
between the scrotum and the anus in a man.
Sitz bath— A shallow tub or bowl, sometimes
mounted above a toilet, that allows the perineum
and buttocks to be immersed in circulating water.
Urinary incontinence— The inability to prevent the
leakage or discharge of urine. This situation
becomes more common as people age, and is
more common in women who have given birth to
more than one child.
Epstein-Barr virus test
At the time of infection with Epstein-Barr virus,
antibodies to EA are found and usually last for four to
six months only. This antibody, however, persists
substantially longer in about 10% of persons who
have had EBV infection in the more remote past. The
absence of antibody to EA when other EBV antibodies
are present strongly suggests that first time infection
with EBV occurred in the past.
Antibody to VCA is found both early and late in
EBV infection. At the time of infection, antibody of
both the IgM and IgG types are detectable. After four
to six months, usually, only the IgG antibody against
VCA can be found.
Unlike antibodies to EA and VCA, antibody to
EBNA does not usually develop until recovery from
first time infection of this virus. Therefore, finding
detectable amounts of antibody to EBNA during an
illness which might be caused by EBV makes the
causal relationship very unlikely.
Preparation
The skin area from which the blood sample will be
obtained is wiped with an antiseptic such as alcohol or
iodine.
Aftercare
The aftercare is similar to that for any blood test.
Usually, pressure is applied to the area for several
moments until bleeding stops. If the results are difficult
to interpret, it may be necessary to re-test later, after
waiting one to three weeks. The change in the amounts
of antibody detected between the two tests can be par-
ticularly useful, at times, in helping to make a diagnosis.
Risks
There are no risks over and above those of having
blood drawn for any other purpose. These tests are
more expensive than many other blood tests but are
usually covered by medical insurance.
Normal results
The pattern of the three antibodies can be used to
determine whether the person has not had infection
with EBV to this point (is susceptible to infection); is
currently, or recently, infected with EBV for the
first time; or has had first time infection with EBV
sometime in the past (more than six months ago).
If one defines ‘‘normal’’ results as either not
having EBV in the past, and call that category one;
or having had it in the past, and call that category
two. Most young children below the age of five will
fall into category one, while most adults over the age
of 20 years will fall into category two.
The results for susceptibility are:
/C15antibody to EA = negative
/C15antibody to VCA (either IgM or IgG) = negative
/C15antibody to EBNA = negative
The results for past infection are:
/C15antibody to EA = negative (90% of time)
/C15antibody to VCA IgM = negative
/C15Antibody to VCA IgG = positive
/C15Antibody to EBNA = Positive.
It is important to realize that the Epstein-Barr
virus, like all the human herpes viruses, does not
totally leave the body after the patient recovers from
illness. With EBV, the virus will intermittently recur in
the saliva of people without any symptoms. Such peo-
ple will have a test pattern of previous infection. It is
this group of people who can transmit EBV to others
without themselves being ill.
Abnormal results
The results for current or recent infection are:
/C15antibody to EA = positive
/C15antibody to VCA IgM = positive
/C15antibody to VCA IgG = positive
/C15antibody to EBNA = negative.
Without the pattern of the three antibodies, it can
be difficult to be accurate in interpretation. The pre-
sence of antibody to VCA IgM is the best single test
for current or recent first time infection.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Henle, G., W. Henle, and C. A. Horowitz. ‘‘Epstein-Barr
Virus Specific Diagnosis: Tests in Infectious
Mononucleosis.’’ Human Pathology5 (1997): 551-558.
Larry I. Lutwick, MD, FACP
ERCP see Endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography
Erectile disorder see Impotence
1358 Epstein-Barr virus test
Erectile dysfunction
Definition
Erectile dysfunction (ED), formerly known as
impotence, is the inability to achieve or maintain an
erection long enough to engage in sexual intercourse.
Description
Under normal circumstances, when a man is
sexually stimulated, his brain sends a message down
the spinal cord and into the nerves of the penis. The
nerve endings in the penis release chemical messengers,
called neurotransmitters, that signal the arteries that
supply blood to the corpora cavernosa (the two
spongy rods of tissue that span the length of the
penis) to relax and fill with blood. As they expand,
the corpora cavernosa close off other veins that
would normally drain blood from the penis. As the
penis becomes engorged with blood, it enlarges and
stiffens, causing an erection. Problems with blood
vessels, nerves, or tissues of the penis can interfere
with an erection.
Causes and symptoms
It is estimated that up to 30 million American
men frequently suffer from ED and that it strikes up
to half of all men between the ages of 40 and 70.
Doctors used to think that most cases of ED were
psychological in origin, but they now recognize that,
at least in older men, physical causes may play a
primary role in 60% or more of all cases. In men
over the age of 60, the leading cause isatherosclerosis ,
or narrowing of the arteries, which can restrict the
flow of blood to the penis. Injury or disease of the
connective tissue, such as Peyronie’s disease,m a y
prevent the corpora cavernosa from completely
expanding. Damage to the nerves of the penis from
certain types of surgery or neurological conditions,
such as Parkinson’s disease ormultiple sclerosis,m a y
also cause ED. Men with diabetes are especially at
risk for erectile dysfunction because of their high risk
of both atherosclerosis and a nerve disease called
diabetic neuropathy.
Some drugs, including certain types of blood
pressure medications, antihistamines, tranquilizers
(especially before intercourse), and antidepressants
known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors
(SSRIs, including Prozac and Paxil) can interfere
with erections.Smoking, excessive alcohol consump-
tion, and illicit drug use may also contribute. In some
cases, low levels of the male hormone testosterone may
contribute to erectile failure. Finally, psychological
factors, such as stress, guilt, or anxiety, may also
play a role, even when the ED is primarily due to
organic causes.
Diagnosis
When diagnosing the underlying cause of erectile
dysfunction, the doctor begins by asking the man a
number of questions about when the problem began,
whether it only happens with specific sex partners, and
whether he ever wakes up with an erection. (Men
whose dysfunction occurs only with certain partners
or who wake up with erections are more likely to have
a psychological cause for their ED.) Sometimes, the
man’s sex partner is also interviewed. In some cases,
domestic discord may be a factor.
The doctor also obtains a thorough medical
history to find out about past pelvic surgery, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, kidney disease , and any
medications the man may be taking. The physical
examination should include a genital examination,
hormone tests, and a glucose test for diabetes.
Sometimes a measurement of blood flow through the
penis may be taken.
Treatment
Years ago, the standard treatment for erectile
dysfunction was a penile implant or long-term psy-
chotherapy. Although physical causes are now more
readily diagnosed and treated, individual or marital
counseling is still an effective treatment for ED when
emotional factors play a role.
There are three prescription medications avail-
able in the United States to treat the physical causes
of ED: sildenafil citrate (Viagra), vardenafil
(Levitra), and tadalafil (Cialis). They help about
three-fourths of all men who try them in the general
population. Several studieshave indicated that their
success rate in diabetic men may be slightly lower,
averaging around 60–65%. All three pills work by
enhancing the effects of nitric oxide. This chemical
relaxes muscles in the penis to allow more blood
to flow in. These pills do not cause an erection by
themselves. Sexual stimulation is also required.
Sildenafil or vardenafil should be taken about an
hour before sex. Each is effective for roughly four
hours. Tadalafil lasts for up to 36 hours. Men should
not have sex more thanonce every 24 hours after
using these drugs. Before Viagra’s approval in 1998,
drug treatment of erectile dysfunction was limited to
alprostadil (prostaglandin [E.sub.1]), either injected
Erectile dysfunction
into the penis or inserted as a pellet into the
urethra. Sales of the three newer ED drugs reached
$3.4 billion in 2004, according to the research firm
IMS Health. In 2004, Viagra had about 66% of the
market share for ED drugs compared to 19% for
Levitra and 14% for Cialis.
Viagra
Sildenafil citrate was or iginally developed in
1991 as a treatment forangina,o rc h e s tpain.T h e
drug, marketed under the name Viagra, received
FDA approval as a treatment for erectile dysfunc-
tion in March 1998, and since that time it has been
prescribed for more then 20 million men worldwide.
It was the first oral medication approved for
ED treatment. Viagra is a vasodilator, a drug that
has the effect of dilating the blood vessels. It works
by improving blood circulation to the penis, and
by enhancing the effects of nitric oxide, the agent
that relaxes the smooth muscle of the penis and
regulates blood vessels during sexual stimulation,
allowing the penis to become engorged and achieve
an erection.
The average recommended dose of Viagra is 50
mg. It comes in doses of 25 mg., 50 mg., and 100 mg to.
The medication is taken approximately one hour
before sexual activity is planned, and may remain
effective for up to four hours. One drawback is that
to be effective, it should be taken on an empty
stomach. Also, high-fat foods can interfere with the
absorption of Viagra. Viagra does not increase sexual
desire. Sexual stimulation and arousal are required for
it to be effective.
Many insurance plans cover the cost of Viagra,
provided it is prescribed to treat erectile dysfunction.
The pills cost approximately $10 each, and insurers
may limit coverage to a specific number of pills each
month.
The primary drawback to Viagra, which works
about an hour after it is taken, it that the FDA
cautions men with heart disease or low blood pressure
to be thoroughly examined by a physician before
obtaining a prescription. At least 130 men have died
while taking Viagra. However, the FDA said the
men—most over the age of 64—died ofheart attack
or stroke due to health problems exaggerated by
sexual activity, not the drug itself.
Levitra
In early 2003, a second prescription drug to treat
erectile dysfunction, Levitra, was approved by the
FDA. Like Viagra, Levitra helps increase blood flow
to the penis and may help men with ED get and keep
an erection. Once a man has completed sexual activity,
blood flow to the penis should decrease and the
erection should go away. Levitra should be taken
approximately 60 minutes prior to sexual activity. In
clinical trials, most patients were able to begin sexual
activity before that time. A 2004 study showed that
about 50% of men taking Levitra experienced a firm
erection within 25 minutes and a small percentage in as
quickly as 10 minutes. Studies also showed that
Levitra improved erectile function in men who had
other health factors, such as diabetes or prostate
surgery.
Men taking nitrate drugs, often used to control
chest pain (also known as angina), should not take
Levitra. Men who use alpha-blockers, sometimes pre-
scribed for high blood pressure or prostate problems,
also should not take Levitra. Such combinations could
cause blood pressure to drop to an unsafe level.
Levitra is available in 2.5 mg, 5 mg, 10 mg, and 20
mg tablets and should be taken no more than once a
day. The average cost per pill is about $10 and is
covered by many insurance plans.
Cialis
Cialis is the third oral drug prescribed to treat
erectile dysfunction, approved by the FDA in
November 2003. Its most notable difference from
Viagra and Levitra, which work for about four
hours, is that Cialis works for up to 36 hours. Cialis
helps increase blood flow in the penis when a man is
sexually stimulated. It can help men with ED get and
keep an erection satisfactory for sexual activity. Once
a man has completed sexual activity, blood flow to his
penis decreases, and his erection goes away. Cialis is
clinically proven to improve erectile function in most
men with ED, including those with mild, moderate or
severe ED.
The most common side effects with Cialis are
headache, upset stomach, back pain, and muscle
aches. These side effects usually go away after a few
hours. Patients who get back pain and muscle aches
usually get it 12 to 24 hours after taking Cialis. Back
pain and muscle aches usually go away by themselves
within 48 hours.
Cialis comes in 5 mg., 10 mg. (the recommended
starting dose), and 20 mg. tablets. The average cost
per tablet is about $10 and it is covered by many
insurance plans. Since the absorption of Cialis is
not affected by food or high-fat foods, it does not
need to be taken on an empty stomach. Studies
1360 Erectile dysfunction
show that in most men, Cialis begins working in
about 30 minutes and may be taken up to once per
day by most patients.
Priapism, a prolonged erection, is a very rare
potential side effect of all prescription ED medica-
tions. Persons taking Viagra, Levitra, or Cialis who
have a prolonged erection, lasting more than four
hours, should seek immediate medical attention.
Priapism can cause damage to the penis potentially
leading to the permanent inability to have an erection.
Because sexual activity can stress the heart, men
who have heart problems should check with their
physician to see if sexual activity is recommended.
Erectile dysfunction drugs may trigger temporary
hypotension (low blood pressure) and is known to
increase cardiovascular nerve activity, so physicians
should prescribe them with caution in men with a
history of heart attack, atherosclerosis (hardening of
the arteries), angina, arrhythmia, and chronic low
blood pressure problems. ED drugs are not labeled
or approved for use by women or children, or by
men without erectile dysfunction. Anyone experien-
cing cardiovascular symptoms such as dizziness,
chest or arm pain, andnausea when participating in
sexual activity after taking an ED medication should
stop the encounter. They should also not take any
ED drug again until they have discussed the episode
with their healthcare provider. It is recommended
that men with kidney or liver impairments, and men
over age 65, start at the lowest possible dosage of ED
medications.
Other treatment options
Although the commercial availability of Viagra,
Levitra, and Cialis has been useful in many men,pros-
tate cancerpatients and ED caused by psychological
problems often require alternative treatment. A com-
monly used alternative consists of a three-drug injec-
tion containing alprostadil, papaverine hydrochloride,
and phentolamine mesylate. Though it is commonly
referred to as the ‘‘Knoxville formula,’’ apparently for
the city of its original introduction, a number of
slightly varying formulas have been in use around
the country. The three-drug preparation is adminis-
tered by injection into the corpora cavernosa to induce
erection.
Other traditional therapies for ED include
vacuum pump therapy, injection therapy involving
injecting a substance into the penis to enhance blood
flow, and a penile implantation device. In rare cases, if
narrowed or diseased veins are responsible for ED,
surgeons may reroute the blood flow into the corpora
cavernosa or remove leaking vessels.
In vacuum pump therapy, a man inserts his penis
into a clear plastic cylinder and uses a pump to force
air out of the cylinder. This forms a partial vacuum
around the penis, which helps to draw blood into
the corpora cavernosa. The man then places a special
ring over the base of the penis to trap the blood
inside it. The only side effect with this type of treat-
ment is occasional bruising if the vacuum is left on
too long.
Injection therapy involves injecting a substance
into the penis to enhance blood flow and cause an
erection. The FDA approved a drug called alprostadil
(Caverject) for this purpose in 1995. Alprostadil
relaxes smooth muscle tissue to enhance blood flow
into the penis. It must be injected shortly before inter-
course. Another, similar drug that is sometimes used is
papaverine. Either drug may sometimes cause painful
erections or priapism that must be treated with a shot
of epinephrine. Alprostadil may also be administered
into the urethral opening of the penis. In MUSE
(medical urethral system for erection), the man inserts
a thin tube the width of a spaghetti noodle into his
urethral opening and presses down on a plunger to
deliver a tiny pellet containing alprostadil into his
penis. The drug takes about 10 minutes to work and
the erection lasts about an hour. The main side effect is
a sensation of pain and burning in the urethra, which
can last about five to 15 minutes. The injection process
itself is often painful
Implantable penile prosthesesare usually consid-
ered a last resort for treating erectile dysfunction.
They are implanted in the corpora cavernosa to
make the penis rigid without the need for blood flow.
The semi-rigid type of prosthesis consists of a pair of
flexible silicone rods that can be bent up or down. This
type of device has a low failure rate but, unfortunately,
it causes the penis to always be erect, which can be
difficult to conceal under clothing.
The inflatable type of device consists of cylinders
that are implanted in the corpora cavernosa, a fluid
reservoir implanted in the abdomen, and a pump
placed in the scrotum. The man squeezes the pump
to move fluid into the cylinders and cause them to
become rigid. (He reverses the process by squeezing
the pump again.) While these devices allow for inter-
mittent erections, they have a slightly higher malfunc-
tion rate than the silicon rods. Men can return to
sexual activity six to eight weeks after implantation
surgery. Since implants affect the corpora cavernosa,
Erectile dysfunction