DISEASE: Helicobacteriosis PepticUlcer
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

400 mcg of this vitamin. Because folic acid deficiency
can causebirth defects, all women of childbearing age
who can become pregnant should consume at least 400
mcg of folic acid daily; a woman who is pregnant
should have regular medical checkups, and take a
good prenatal vitamin.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Ronnenberg, Alayne G., et al. ‘‘IPreceonception
Hemoglobin and Ferritin Concentrations Are
Associated With Pregnancy Outcome in a Prospective
Cohort of Chinese Women.’’The Journal of Nutrition
October 2004: 2586–2592.
Maureen Haggerty
Teresa G. Odle
Follicle-stimulating hormone
test
Definition
The follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) test mea-
sures the amount of FSH in the blood. FSH is a
hormone that regulates the growth and development
of eggs and sperm, and this test is used to diagnose or
evaluate disorders involving the pituitary gland and
reproductive system.
Purpose
FSH testing is performed if a physician suspects
the patient may have a disorder involving the repro-
ductive system or pituitary gland. The pituitary gland
produces FSH, which stimulates the growth of the
sacks (follicles) that surround the eggs in a woman’s
ovaries. This is important for the process of ovulation,
in which the egg is released. In men, FSH stimulates
production of sperm. If there are abnormal levels of
FSH in the blood it may mean that one of several
disorders are present. Normal fluctuations occur as a
result ofpuberty, the menstrual cycle,pregnancy, and
menopause.
The FSH test is performed more often on women
than on men. In women, it is used to determine if
menopause has begun, to diagnoseinfertility and men-
strual disorders (such as anovulatory bleeding), to
measure hormone levels in children who enter puberty
at an early age, and to diagnose other disorders. In
men, it can be used to determine early puberty,
abnormal tissue growth on one or more of the
hormone-secreting (endocrine) glands (called multiple
endocrine neoplasia), or to diagnose other disorders.
Description
The FSH test is a blood test. Blood will be drawn
from the patient and analyzed in a laboratory.
Preparation
In preparation for the test, there are no food or
fluid intake restrictions. Patients may be advised to
discontinue certain medications for 48 hours before
the test. A menstruating woman having hot flashes or
irregular periods should be tested on the second or
third day of her menstrual cycle. A woman who has
missed a period and is having other menopausal symp-
toms can be tested at any time.
Aftercare
No aftercare is necessary.
Risks
There are no risks associated with this test.
Normal results
Normal FSH test results vary according to age and
sexual maturity. The phase of a woman’s menstrual
cycle or use of birth-control pills also affects test results.
For an adult male, normal results range from
about 4–25 units of FSH in every liter of blood (U/L)
or about 5–20 micro-international units in every
milliliter.
For a premenopausal woman, normal values
range from 4–30 U/L or 5–20 micro-international
units per milliliter. In a pregnant woman, FSH levels
are too low to measure. After menopause, normal
values range from 40–250 U/L or 50–100 micro-
international units per milliliter.
FSH levels fluctuate during premenopause. If no
other symptoms are present, an elevated FSH level
should not be interpreted as proof that menopause
has begun.
Abnormal results
Anorexia nervosaand disorders of the hypothala-
mus or pituitary gland can result in abnormally low
FSH levels.
Follicle-stimulating hormone test
Abnormal levels can also indicate:
/C15infertility
/C15hypopituitarism
/C15klinefelter syndrome (in men)
/C15turner syndrome
/C15ovarian failure
/C15polycystic ovary syndrome
Resources
OTHER
‘‘Follicle-Stimulating Hormone Test.’’Health Answers.com
February 25, 1998. <http://www.healthanswers.com>.
Maureen Haggerty
Follicular cysts see Ovarian cysts
Folliculitis
Definition
Folliculitis is inflammation or infection of one
or more hair follicles (openings in the skin that
enclose hair).
Description
Folliculitis can affect both women and men at any
age. It can develop on any part of the body, but is most
likely to occur on the scalp, face, or parts of the arms,
armpits, or legs not usually covered by clothing.
Small, yellowish-white blister-like lumps (pus-
tules) surrounded by narrow red rings are usually pre-
sent with both bacterial folliculitis and fungal
folliculitis. Hair can grow through or alongside of
the pustules, which sometimes ooze blood-stained pus.
Folliculitis can causeboils and, in rare instances,
serious skin infections. Bacteria from folliculitis can
enter the blood stream and travel to other parts of the
body.
Causes and symptoms
Folliculitis develops when bacteria, such as
Staphylococcus, or a fungus enters the body through
a cut, scrape, surgical incision, or other break in the
skin near a hair follicle. Scratching the affected area
can trap fungus or bacteria under the fingernails and
spread the infection to hair follicles on other parts of
the body.
The bacteria that cause folliculitis are contagious.
A person who has folliculitis can infect others who live
in the same household.
Factors that increase the risk of developing folli-
culitis include:
/C15dermatitis
/C15diabetes
/C15dirty, crowded living conditions
/C15eczema
/C15exposure to hot, humid temperatures
/C15infection in the nose or other recent illness
/C15tight clothing
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the patient’s medical history
and observations. Laboratory analysis of the sub-
stance drained from a pustule can be used to distin-
guish bacterial folliculitis from fungal folliculitis.
Treatment
Bacterial folliculitis may disappear without treat-
ment, but is likely to recur. Non-prescriptiontopical
antibiotics like Bacitracin, Mycitracin, or Neomycin,
gently rubbed on to affected areas three or four times a
KEY TERMS
Anovulatory bleeding— Bleeding without release
of an egg from an ovary.
Hypopituitarism— Underactivity of the pituitary
gland.
Hypothalamus— The part of the brain that controls
the endocrine system.
Klinefelter’s syndrome— Chromosomal abnormal-
ity characterized by small testes and male infertility.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia— Abnormal tissue
growth on one or more of the endocrine (hormone-
secreting) glands.
Polycystic ovary disease— A condition in which a
woman has little or no menstruation, is infertile, has
excessive body hair, and is obese. The ovaries may
contain several cysts.
Turner syndrome— Chromosomal abnormality char-
acterized byimmature reproductive organs in women.
1502 Folliculitis
day, can clear up a small number of bacterial follicu-
litis pustules. Oral antibiotics such as erythromycin
(Erythocin) may be prescribed if the infection is wide-
spread. The drug griseofulvin (Fulvicin) and topical
antifungal medications are used to treat fungal
folliculitis.
A doctor should be notified if:
/C15pustules spread after treatment has begun or reap-
pear after treatment is completed
/C15the patient’sfever climbs above 1008F (37.88C)
/C15the patient develops boils or swollen ankles
/C15redness, swelling, warmth, orpain indicate that the
infection has spread
/C15unexplained new symptoms appear
Alternative treatment
Eating a balanced diet, including protein, complex
carbohydrates, healthy fats, fresh fruits and vegeta-
bles, and drinking eight to 10 glasses of water a day
may stimulate the body’s immune system and shorten
the course of the infection. Garlic (Allium sativum) and
goldenseal ( Hydrastis canadensis ), both antiseptic
agents against staph infections, may be taken. The
daily dosage would vary from person to person and
is based on the severity of the infection. Echinacea
(Echinacea spp.) is helpful in modulating immune
function. Again, the dosage would vary.
Daily doses of 30–50 mg zinc and 1,000–5,000 mg
Vitamin C (taken in equal amounts at several times
during the day), and 300–2,000 mg bioflavinoids can
also strengthen the body’s infection-fighting ability.
High doses of vitamins and minerals should not be
used without a doctor’s approval.
Prognosis
If properly treated, the symptoms of bacterial
folliculitis generally disappear in about two weeks.
Fungal folliculitis should clear up within six weeks.
But it can worsen if the condition is misdiagnosed and
inappropriately treated with steroid creams.
Prevention
Anyone who has a tendency to develop folliculitis
should cleanse the skin with antibacterial soap twice a
day and before shaving and should not use oily skin
lotions. Men should not shave while the beard area is
infected. When they begin shaving again, they should
use a new blade each time. Women who have had
fungal folliculitis should use depilatory creams instead
of razors. Daily shampooing can help prevent follicu-
litis in the scalp. The spread of infection can be pre-
vented by not sharing towels or washcloths.
Resources
OTHER
‘‘Folliculitis.’’ Thrive Online.April 5, 1998. <http://
thriveonline.oxygen.com>.
Maureen Haggerty
Food allergies
Definition
Food allergies are the body’s abnormal responses
to harmless foods; the reactions are caused by the
immune system’s reaction to some food proteins.
Description
Food allergies are often confused with food intol-
erance. However, the two conditions have different
causes and produce different symptoms. A food
allergy is also known as food hypersensitivity. The
allergy is caused when a person eats something that
the immune system incorrectly identifies as harmful.
Acne folliculitis. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by
permission.)
Food allergies
Food allergies
About 4% of adults have food allergies according
to the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID). The condition affects approxi-
mately 6 to 8% of children age 4 and younger.
The immune system works to protect the body
and creates food-specific antibodies. The antibodies
are proteins that battle antigens, substances that are
foreign or initially outside the body. The introduction
of an antigen produces the immune response.
Antibodies are created to destroy the antigen or coun-
teract its effectiveness.
The food that triggered that reaction is called an
allergen. The antibodies are like an alarm system
coded to detect the food regarded as harmful. The
next time the person eats that food, the immune sys-
tem discharges a large amount of histamine and che-
micals. This process meant to protect the body against
the allergen causes an allergic reaction that can affect
the respiratory tract, digestive tract, skin, and cardio-
vascular system.
Allergic reactions can occur in minutes or in up to
two hours after the person ate the food. Symptoms
include swelling of the tongue,diarrhea, andhives.I n
severe cases, the allergic reaction can be fatal. The
most severe reaction isanaphylaxis, which could be
life-threatening.
Food intolerance
While food allergies involve the immune system,
food intolerance is not related to the immune system.
For example, a person who is lactose intolerant has a
shortage of lactose, the digestive enzyme that breaks
down the sugar in milk and dairy products. That
person could experience stomachpain or bloating sev-
eral hours after drinking milk.
People who are food-intolerant can sometimes
consume that food and not experience intolerance
symptoms. Those diagnosed with food allergies must
avoid the foods that produce the allergic reactions.
Allergy-producing foods
Although approximately 160 foods produce aller-
gic reactions, approximately 90% of reactions are
caused by some or all items within eight food families.
These are milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, fish, shellfish,
wheat, and soy. These foods can cause severe reac-
tions. The most adverse reactions are caused by pea-
nuts and tree nuts. According to NIAID, about 0.6%
of Americans are impacted by peanut allergies.
Approximately 0.4% of Americans have allergic reac-
tions to tree nuts.
Food allergy demographics
Most children have allergies to eggs, milk, pea-
nuts or tree nuts, and soy, according to the American
Dietetic Association (ADA). The young generally out-
grow their allergies. They are more likely to outgrow
milk and soy allergies, according to NIAID. However,
children and adults usually allergic to peanuts and tree
nuts for life. The most frequent causes of food allergies
in adulthood are peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish.
Allergies are hereditary. There is a tendency for
the immune system to create IgE antibodies in people
with family histories of allergies and allergic condi-
tions like hayfever and asthma, according to NIAID.
The likelihood of a child having food allergies
increases when both parents are allergic.
Furthermore, people are allergic to the foods that
are eaten frequently in their countries. A rice allergy is
more common in Japan, and codfish allergies occur
more in Scandinavian countries, according to NIAID.
Causes and symptoms
Food allergies are caused by the immune system’s
reaction to a food item that it believes is harmful.
When the food is digested, the immune system
responds by creating immunoglobulin E (IgE) anti-
bodies as a defense. The antibodies are proteins
found in the bloodstream. Formed to protect the
body against harmful substances, the antibodies are
created after the person’s first exposure to the allergen.
The majority of food allergies are caused by foods
in eight families. In some families, every food causes
an allergic reaction. In other families like shellfish, a
person may be allergic to one species, but able to eat
others. The allergy-inducing foods include:
/C15Milk. The dairy family includes milk, ice cream,
yogurt, butter, and some margarines. Nondairy
foods that contain casein must be avoided.
Prepared foods that contain milk range from breads
and doughnuts to sausage and soup, according to
the ADA.
/C15Eggs. Although a person may be allergic to either the
egg white or yolk, the entire egg must be avoided
because there is a risk of cross-contamination. Eggs
are an ingredient in mayonnaise. Moreover, pro-
ducts such as baked goods, breads, pasta, yogurt,
and batter on fried foods may contain eggs. In addi-
tion, some egg-substitute products contain
egg whites.
1504 Food allergies
/C15Peanuts grow in the ground and are legumes like
lentils and chickpeas. A person with a peanut allergy
may not be allergic to other legumes or tree nuts.
Products to be avoided include peanuts, peanut but-
ter, peanut oil, and some desserts and candy. In
addition, some Asian dishes are prepared with a pea-
nut sauce. Tree nuts include almonds, cashews,
pecans, walnuts, Brazil nuts, chestnuts, hazelnuts,
macadamia nuts, pine nuts, pistachios, and hickory
nuts. Products containing tree nuts include nut oil,
nut oil, desserts, candy, crackers, and barbecue
sauce. A person may be allergic to one type of nut
but able to eat other nuts. That should be determined
after consulting with a doctor.
/C15Fish allergy is generally diagnosed as an allergy to all
fish species because the allergen is similar among the
different species.
/C15Shellfish species include lobster, crab, shrimp, clams,
oysters, scallops, mollusks, and crawfish. An allergy
to one type of shellfish may indicate an allergy to
others.
/C15Wheat is a grain found in numerous foods including
breads, cereals, pastas, lunch meats, desserts, and
bulgar. It is also found in products such as enriched
flour and farina.
/C15Soy. The soybean is a legume, and people who have
this allergy are rarely allergic to peanuts or other
legumes. Soy is an ingredient in many processed
foods including crackers and baked goods, sauces,
and soups. There is also soy in canned tuna, accord-
ing to the ADA.
The chemical reaction
During the initial exposure, many IgE antibodies
are created. These attach to mast cells. These cells are
located in tissue throughout the body, especially in
areas such as the nose, throat, lungs, skin, and gastro-
intestinal tract. These are also the areas where allergic
reactions occur.
The antibodies are in place, and a reaction is
triggered the next time the person eats the food
regarded as harmful. As the allergen reacts with the
IgE, the body releases histamine and other chemicals.
Histamine is a chemical located in the body’s cells.
When released during an allergic reaction, hist-
amine and other chemicals cause symptoms like
inflammation.
The type of allergic reaction depends on where the
antibodies are released, according to NIAID.
Chemicals released in the ears, nose, and throat
could cause the mouth to itch. The person may also
have difficulty breathing or swallowing. If the allergen
triggers a reaction in the gastrointestinal tract, the
person could experience stomach pain or diarrhea.
An allergic reaction that affects skin cells could pro-
duce hives. This condition also known as urticaria is
an allergic reaction characterized byitching, swelling,
and the presence of patchy red areas called wheals.
Severe allergic reaction
Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that is
potentially life-threatening. Also known as an ana-
phylactic reaction, this condition requires immediate
medical attention. The reaction occurs within seconds
or up to several hours after the person ate the allergy-
inducing food.
Symptoms can include difficulty breathing, a
tingling feeling in the mouth, and a swelling in the
tongue and throat. The person may experience hives,
vomiting, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea. There is
also a sudden drop in blood pressure. Anaphylaxis
could be fatal if not treated promptly.
Each year, some 150 Americans die from food-
induced anaphylaxism, according to NIAID. The
casualties are generally adolescents and young adults.
The risk increases for people who have allergies and
asthma. Also at increased risk are people who experi-
enced previous episodes of a naphylaxis.
The peanut is one of the primary foods that trigger
an anaphylactic reaction. Tree nuts also cause the
reaction. The nuts generally linked to anaphylaxis
are almonds, Brazil nuts, cashews, chestnuts, hazel-
nuts, macadamia nuts, pecans, pine nuts, pistachios
and walnuts. Fish, shellfish, and eggs can also set off
the reaction, according to the ADA.
Cross-reactivity
Cross-reactivity is the tendency of a person with
one allergy to reaction to another allergen. A person
allergic to crab might also be allergic to shrimp. In
addition, someone with ragweed sensitivity could
experience sensations when trying to eat melons dur-
ing ragweed pollinating season, according to NIAID.
The person’s mouth would start itching, and the per-
son wouldn’t be able to eat the melon. The cross-
reaction happens frequently with cantaloupes. The
condition is known as oral allergy syndrome.
Diagnosis
Food allergies are diagnosed by first determin-
ing whether a person has an allergy or if symptoms
are related to a condition like food intolerance.
Food allergies
The medical professional may be a board-certified
allergist, a doctor with education and experience in
treating allergies. However, some health plans may
require that the patient first see a family practice
doctor.
If food allergies are suspected, the doctor will take
a detailed case history. The doctor asks the patient if
there is a family history of allergies. Other questions
are related to the patient’s adverse reactions.
The doctor’s questions include how the food was
prepared, the amount eaten and what time the reac-
tion happened. The patient describes the symptoms
and actions taken to relieve them. The doctor also
asks if the patient had other similar experiences when
eating that food.
The patient receives a physical exam. In addition,
the doctor may ask the patient to keep a food diary, a
log of what the person eats for one to two weeks. The
medical history and the food diary are used in con-
junction with testing to diagnose the patient.
Allergy tests
Doctors generally start the testing process with a
skin test or a blood test. The prick skin test, which is
also known as the scratch test, examines the patient’s
reaction to a solution containing a protein that trig-
gers allergies.
The doctor places a drop of the substance on the
patient’s arm or back. The doctor then uses a needle to
prick or scratch the skin. This allows the potential
allergen to enter the patient’s skin. If more than one
food allergy is suspected, the test is repeated with other
proteins applied to the skin. After about 15 minutes,
the doctor can read the reactions on the patient’s skin.
If there is no reaction, the patient is probably not
allergic to that food. The possibility of an allergy is
indicated by the presence of a wheal, a bump that
resembles a mosquito bite. The wheal signifies a posi-
tive reaction to the test. However, the test may show a
false positive, which is a reaction to a food that does
not cause allergies.
The skin test is not appropriate for people who are
severely allergic or have skin conditions like eczema.
Those people are given the RAST (radioallergosor-
bent test). This test measures the presence of food-
specific IgE in the blood. After a sample of the
patient’s blood is taken, it is sent to a laboratory.
The sample is tested with different foods. Levels of
antibodies are measured, and the reactions to different
proteins are ranked. While measurement systems may
vary, a high ranking indicates a high number of
antibodies. Lab results are generally completed within
a week.
Results to this test may not be conclusive. A nega-
tive test may not have identified antibodies in the
patient’s blood. Positive results make it probable but
not definite that the patient has allergies.
Costs for blood and skin tests will vary, with fees
ranging from $10 to more than $300. Insurance may
cover some of the cost. While both tests are reliable,
they aren’t 100% accurate. If questions remain, the
diagnosis takes into account the patient’s medical his-
tory and the food diary. If necessary, the patient is put
on a special diet.
Elimination diet
If the skin or blood test shows strong positive
results, the doctor may put the patient on an elimina-
tion diet. This is done when needed to narrow the list
of suspected allergens. The person stops eating the
foods suspected of causing the allergic reaction. That
food is eliminated from the diet for from two to four
weeks. If allergy symptoms improve, the food is prob-
ably an allergen.
If more confirmation is needed, the doctor may
ask the patient to start eating the food again. The
elimination diet procedure is generally not utilized if
the patient initially had a severe reaction.
Food challenges
Other tests called food challenges may be per-
formed. The challenges are done in a medical setting,
with a doctor present. The patient is given capsules
that each contain a different food. Some capsules
contain allergy-producing foods. Other capsules may
be placebos that won’t produce a reaction.
The patient swallows the capsule, and the doctor
watches for an allergic reaction. In an open food chal-
lenge, doctor and patient are aware of the capsule
contents. In a single-blind food challenge, only the
doctor knows. In a double-blind challenge, neither
doctor nor patient knows the contents.
Challenges are rarely authorized by health care
providers. Testing is time-consuming and many aller-
gens are difficult to evaluate with the challenges,
according to NIAID.
Treatment
The treatment for food allergies is to avoid eating
the food that causes the allergy. This preventive treat-
ment includes reading food labels. Manufacturers are
1506 Food allergies
required by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
to list a product’s ingredients on the label. However, if
there is a question about an ingredient, the person
should contact the manufacturer before eating the
food. When dining out, people should ask if food
contains the allergen or ingredients contain the
allergy-inducing foods.
When reading food labels, people with food aller-
gies should know that:
/C15Words indicating the presence of milk include lac-
tose, ghee, and whey.
/C15Words signifying eggs in a product include albumin,
globulin, and ovomucin.
/C15While it is apparent that peanuts are an ingredient in
a product like peanut butter, there could be peanuts
in hydrolyzed plant protein and hydrolyzed vegeta-
ble protein.
/C15People with tree nut allergies should carefully read
the labels of products such as cereals and barbecue
sauce.
/C15The American Dietetic Association cautions that
surimi, an ingredient in imitation seafood, is made
from fish muscle. Furthermore, fish in the form of
anchovies is sometimes an ingredient in Worcestshire
sauce.
/C15Words on labels that signal the presence of wheat
include gluten, sietan, and vital gluten.
Allergies and children
Parents of children with food allergies need to
monitor their children’s food choices. They also must
know how to care for the child if there is an allergic
reaction. Parents need to notify the child’s school
about the condition. Caregivers should be informed,
too. Both the school and caregivers should know how
to handle an allergic reaction. Care must be taken
because a highly allergic person could react to a piece
of food as small as 1/44,000 of a peanut kernel, accord-
ing to NIAID.
Living with severe allergies
Despite precautions, people may accidentally eat
something that causes an allergic reaction. People with
severe allergies must be prepared to treat the condition
and prevent an anaphylactic reaction. A medical alert
bracelet should be worn. This informs people that the
person has a food allergy and could have severe
reactions.
To reduce the risks from an anaphylactic reaction,
the person carries a syringe filled with epinephrine,
which is adrenaline. This is a prescription medication
sold commercially as the EpiPen auto injector. While
prices vary, one syringe costs about $50.
The person with allergies must know how to inject
the epinephrine. It is helpful for other family members
to know how to do this, and parents of an allergic child
must be trained in the procedure.
The person is injected at the first sign of a severe
reaction. Medical attention is required, and the person
should be taken to an emergency room. The person will
be treated and monitored because there could be a sec-
ondseverereactionaboutfourhoursaftertheinitialone.
Allergy treatment research
There was no cure for food allergies as of the spring
of 2005. That could change, with some relief available
for people diagnosed with peanut allergies. According
to a study reported on in 2003 in theNew England
Journal of Medicine, 84 people who took the drug
TNX-901 had a decrease in their IgE antibody levels.
Organizations including the Food Allergy &
Anaphylaxis Network (FAAN) lauded the results of
the study that was conducted from July of 1999
through March of 2002. Work on that study was
stopped in 2004 when biotechnology companies
Genentech, Novartis, and Tanox concentrated efforts
instead on use of an asthma medication for treating
peanut allergies. Research started in June of 2004 on
omalizumab, a medication sold commercially as
Xolair. The study of Xolair’s effectiveness was
expected to take from two to three years.
Alternative treatment
The only treatment for food allergies is for a per-
son to stop eating the food that causes the allergies.
Some alternative treatments may be helpful in easing
the symptoms caused by allergies. However, people
should check with their health care providers before
embarking on an alternative treatment.
Prognosis
Food allergies cannot be cured, but they can be
managed. The allergen-inducing foods should be
avoided. These foods should be replaced with others
that provide thevitamins and nutrients needed for a
healthy diet. Organizations including the American
Dietetic Association recommend the following dietetic
changes:
/C15Milk is a source of calcium and vitamins A and D.
For people with milk allergies, alternate choices of
Food allergies
calcium include calcium-fortified orange juice and
cereal.
/C15Since eggs are an ingredient in products like bread,
egg-free sources of grains are an alternate source of
vitamin B.
/C15Peanuts are a source of vitamin E, niacin, and mag-
nesium. Other sources of these nutrients include
other legumes, meat, and grains.
/C15Fish is a source of protein and nutrients like B vita-
mins and niacin. Alternate sources of these nutrients
should be sought.
/C15Wheat is a source of many nutrients including niacin
and riboflavin. The person allergic to wheat should
substitute products made from grains such as oat,
corn, rice and barley.
/C15Although soybeans are rich in nutrients, very little
soy is used in commercial products. As a result, a
person with this food allergy would not need to find a
safe substitute in order to get needed nutrients.
Prevention
People prevent the return of food allergies by follow-
ing treatment guidelines. These include avoiding the
foods that cause allergic reactions, reading food labels,
and taking measuresto prevent an anaphylactic reaction.
A n a p h y l a x i si sam a j o rc o n c e r na f t e rad i a g n o s i so f
severe food allergies. To reduce the risks associated this
reaction, people with food allergies should wear medical
alert bracelets and never go anywhere without epine-
phrine. If possible, family members or friends of adults
with allergies should learn how to administer this
medication.
The American Dietetic Association advises people
to develop an emergency plan. ADA recommenda-
tions include preparing a list of the foods the person
is allergic to, three emergency contacts, the doctor’s
name, and a description of how to treat the reaction.
This list is kept with the epinephrine syringe.
Resources
BOOKS
Freund, Lee and Rejaunier, Jeanne.The Complete Idiot’s
Guide to Food Allergies.Penguin Group, USA, 2003.
The American Dietetic Association.Food Allergies: How to
Eat Safely and Enjoyably.John Wiley & Sons., 1998.
PERIODICALS
ORGANIZATIONS
American Dietetic Association. 120 South Riverside Plaza,
Suite 2000. Chicago, IL 60606-6995. 800-877-1600.
<http://www.eatright.org>.
American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. 555
East Wells Street Suite 1100, Milwaukee, WI 53202-
3823. 414-272-6071. <http://www.aaaai.org>.
The Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network. 11781 Lee
Jackson Highway, Suite 160, Fairfax, VA 22033.
800-929-4040. <http://www.foodallergy.org>.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. 6610
Rockledge Drive, MSC 6612, Bethesda, MD 20892-
6612. 301-496-5717. <http://www.niaid.nih.gov>.
OTHER
Food Allergy An Overview. National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases. July 2004. [cited March 30,
2005]. <http://www.niaid.nih.gov/publications/pdf/
foodallergy.pdf>.
Peanut Anti-IgE Study Update. The Food Allergy &
Anaphylaxis Network. September 2, 2004 [cited
April 5]. <http://www.foodallergy.org/Research/
antiigetherapy.html>.
Liz Swain
Food poisoning
Definition
Food poisoning is a general term for health pro-
blems arising from eating contaminated food. Food
may be contaminated by bacteria, viruses, environ-
mental toxins, or toxins present within the food itself,
such as the poisons in some mushrooms or certain
seafood. Symptoms of food poisoning usually involve
nausea, vomiting and/ordiarrhea. Some food-borne
toxins can affect the nervous system.
Description
Every year millions of people suffer from bouts of
vomiting and diarrhea each year that they blame on
‘‘something I ate.’’ These people are generally correct.
Each year in the United States, one to two bouts of
diarrheal illness occur in every adult. The Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that
there are from six to 33 million cases of food poisoning
in the United States annually. Many cases are mild
and pass so rapidly that they are never diagnosed.
Occasionally a severe outbreak creates a newsworthy
public health hazard.
Classical food poisoning, sometimes incorrectly
called ptomaine poisoning, is caused by a variety of
different bacteria. The most common areSalmonella,
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli O157:H7 or
1508 Food poisoning
other E. coli strains,Shigella, andClostridium botuli-
num. Each has a slightly different incubation period
and duration, but all exceptC. botulinumcause inflam-
mation of the intestines and diarrhea. Sometimes food
poisoning is called bacterialgastroenteritis or infec-
tious diarrhea. Food and water can also be contami-
nated by viruses (such as the Norwalk agent that
causes diarrhea and the viruses ofhepatitis Aand E),
environmental toxins (heavy metals), and poisons pro-
duced within the food itself (mushroom poisoning or
fish and shellfish poisoning).
Careless food handling during the trip from farm
to table creates conditions for the growth of bacteria
that make people sick. Vegetables that are eaten raw,
such as lettuce, may be contaminated by bacteria in
soil, water, and dust during washing and packing.
Home canned and commercially canned food may be
improperly processed at too low a temperature or for
too short a time to kill the bacteria.
Raw meats carry many food-borne bacterial
diseases. The United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) estimates that 60% or more
of raw poultry sold at retail carry some disease-
causing bacteria. Other raw meat products and eggs
are contaminated to a lesser degree. Thorough cook-
ing kills the bacteria and makes the food harmless.
However, properly cooked food can become re-
contaminated if it comes in contact with plates, cutting
boards, countertops, or utensils that were used with
raw meat and not cleaned and sanitized.
Cooked foods can also be contaminated after
cooking by bacteria carried by food handlers or from
bacteria in the environment. It is estimated that 50%
of healthy people have the bacteriaStaphylococcus
aureus in their nasal passages and throat, and on
their skin and hair. Rubbing a runny nose, then touch-
ing food can introduce the bacteria into cooked food.
Bacteria flourish at room temperature, and will
rapidly grow into quantities capable of making people
sick. To prevent this growth, food must be kept hot or
cold, but never just warm.
Although the food supply in the United States is
probably the safest in the world, anyone can get food
poisoning. Serious outbreaks are rare. When they
A L I C E C A T H E R I N E E V A N S (1881–1975)
(Corbis. Reproduced by permission.)
Alice Catherine Evans was born on January 29, 1881, in
Neath, Pennsylvania. Evans was the second of two children
born to Anne Evans and William Howell. Evans taught grade
school for four years because she could not afford to pay
college tuition. Following her time as a teacher, Evans
enrolled at the Cornell University College of Agriculture,
earning her B.S. degree. Evans’ professor recommended
her for a scholarship, which she received, and she began
her master’s degree program at the University of Wisconsin
where she earned her degree in 1910.
In 1911, Evans took a position with the University of
Wisconsin’s Dairy Division as a researcher studying
cheese-making instead of continuing her education. In
1913, she moved to Washington, D.C., with the division
and worked with a team on identifying the cause of con-
tamination in raw cow’s milk. By 1917, Evans’ research
had shown that the bacteria responsible for undulant
(Malta) fever was very similar to one found when a cow
experienced a spontaneous abortion. When administered
to guinea pigs, the two bacteria produced similar results.
Her findings were met with much skepticism but, as time
went on, Evans’ research began to gain support. She con-
tinued to document cases of the disease and to argue for
the pasteurization process. Finally, after 1930, officials
responsible for public health and safety realized the
need for this process, which ultimately became a standard
procedure. Evans retired from her position with the
National Institute of Health in 1945 and died on
September 5, 1975.
Food poisoning
occur, the very young, the very old, and those with
immune system weaknesses have the most severe and
life-threatening cases. For example, this group is
20 times more likely to become infected with the
Salmonella bacteria than the general population.
Travel outside the United States to countries
where less attention is paid to sanitation, water purifi-
cation, and good food handling practices increases the
chances that a person will get food poisoning. People
living in institutions such as nursing homes are also
more likely to get food poisoning.
Causes and symptoms
The symptoms of food poisoning occur because
food-borne bacteria release toxins or poisons as a
byproduct of their growth in the body. These toxins
(except those fromC. botulinum) cause inflammation
and swelling of the stomach, small intestine and/or
large intestine. The result is abdominal muscle cramp-
ing, vomiting, diarrhea,fever, and the chance ofdehy-
dration. The severity of symptoms depends on the type
of bacteria, the amount consumed, and the indivi-
dual’s general health and sensitivity to the bacterial
toxin.
Salmonella
According to a 2001 report from the CDC,
Salmonella caused almost 50,000 culture-confirmed
cases of food poisoning in the United States annually.
However, between two and four million probably
occur each year. Salmonella is found in egg yolks
from infected chickens, in raw and undercooked poul-
try and in other meats, dairy products, fish, shrimp,
and many more foods. The CDC estimates that one
out of every 50 consumers is exposed to a contami-
nated egg yolk each year. However, thorough cooking
kills the bacteria and makes the food harmless.
Salmonella is also found in the feces of pet reptiles
such as turtles, lizards, and snakes.
About one out of every 1,000 people get food
poisoning from Salmonella. Of these, two-thirds are
under age 20, with the majority under age nine. Most
cases occur in the warm months between July and
October.
Symptoms of food poisoning begin eight to
72 hours after eating food contaminated with
Salmonella. These include traditional food poisoning
symptoms of abdominalpain, diarrhea, vomiting, and
fever. The symptoms generally last one to five days.
Dehydration can be a complication in severe cases.
People generally recover without antibiotic treatment,
although they may feel tired for a week after the active
symptoms subside.
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus aureusis found on humans and in
the environment in dust, air, and sewage. The bacteria
is spread primarily by food handlers using poor sani-
tary practices. Almost any food can be contaminated,
but salad dressings, milk products, cream pastries, and
any food kept at room temperature, rather than hot or
cold are likely candidates.
It is difficult to estimate the number of cases of
food poisoning fromStaphylococcus aureusthat occur
each year, because its symptoms are so similar to those
caused by other foodborne bacteria. Many cases are
mild and the victim never sees a doctor.
Symptoms appear rapidly, usually one to six
hours after the contaminated food is eaten. The
acute symptoms of vomiting and severe abdominal
cramps without fever usually last only three to six
hours and rarely more than 24 hours. Most people
recover without medical assistance. Deaths are rare.
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
There are many strains ofE. coli, and not all of
them are harmful. The strain that causes most severe
food poisoning isE. coli O157:H7. Food poisoning by
E. coli occurs in three out of every 10,000 people.
Foodborne E. coliis found and transmitted mainly in
food derived from cows such as raw milk, raw or rare
ground beef and fruit or vegetables that are
contaminated.
Symptoms of food poisoning from E. coli are
slower to appear than those caused by some of the
other foodborne bacteria.E. coli produces toxins in
the large intestine rather than higher up in the
Common Pathogens Causing Food Poisoning
Pathogen Common Host(s)
Campylobacter Poultry
E.coli 0157:H7 Undercooked, contaminated ground beef
Listeria Found in a variety of raw foods, such as uncooked
meats and vegetables, and in processed foods that
become contaminated after processing
Salmonella Poultry, eggs, meat, and milk
Shigella This bacteria is transmitted through direct contact with
an infected person or from food or water that become
contaminated by an infected person
Vibrio Contaminated seafood
1510 Food poisoning
digestive system. This accounts for the delay in symp-
toms and the fact that vomiting rarely occurs inE. coli
food poisoning.
One to three days after eating contaminated food,
the victim withE. coli O157:H7begins to have severe
abdominal cramps and watery diarrhea that usually
becomes bloody within 24 hours. There is little or no
fever, and rarely does the victim vomit. The bloody,
watery diarrhea lasts from one to eight days in uncom-
plicated cases.
Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni)
According to the FDA,C. jejuni is the leading
cause of bacterial diarrhea in the United States. It is
responsible for more cases of bacterial diarrhea than
Shigella and Salmonella combined. Anyone can get
food poisoning from C. jejuni, but children under
five and young adults between the ages of 15 and 29
are more frequently infected.
C. jejuni is carried by healthy cattle, chickens,
birds, and flies. It is not carried by healthy people in
the United States or Europe. The bacteria is also
found ponds and stream water. The ingestion of only
a few hundredC. jejuni bacteria can make a person
sick.
Symptoms of food poisoning begin two to five
days after eating food contaminated withC. jejuni.
These symptoms include fever, abdominal pain, nau-
sea, headache, muscle pain, and diarrhea. The diar-
rhea can be watery or sticky and may contain blood.
Symptoms last from seven to 10 days, and relapses
occur in about one quarter of people who are infected.
Dehydration is a common complication. Other com-
plications such as arthritis-like joint pain and hemoly-
tic-uremic syndrome (HUS) are rare.
Shigella
Shigella is a common cause of diarrhea in travelers
to developing countries. It is associated with contami-
nated food and water, crowded living conditions, and
poor sanitation. The bacterial toxins affect the small
intestine.
Symptoms of food poisoning byShigella appear
36–72 hours after eating contaminated food. These
symptoms are slightly different from those associated
with most foodborne bacteria. In addition to the
familiar watery diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdom-
inal cramps, chills and fever occur. The diarrhea may
be quite severe with cramps progressing to classical
dysentery. Up to 40% of children with severe infec-
tions show neurological symptoms. These include
seizures caused by fever, confusion, headache,
lethargy, and a stiff neck that resemblesmeningitis.
The disease runs its course usually in two to three
days but may last longer. Dehydration is a common
complication. Most people recover on their own,
although they may feel exhausted, but children who
are malnourished or have weakened immune systems
may die.
Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum)
C. botulinum, which causes both adultbotulism
and infant botulism, is unlike any of the other food-
borne bacteria. First, C. botulinum is an anaerobic
bacterium in that it can only live in the absence of
oxygen. Second, the toxins from C. botulinum are
neurotoxins. They poison the nervous system, causing
paralysis without the vomiting and diarrhea asso-
ciated with other foodborne illnesses. Third, toxins
that cause adult botulism are released when the bac-
teria grows in an airless environment outside the body.
They can be broken down and made harmless by heat.
Finally, botulism is much more likely to be fatal even
in tiny quantities.
Adult botulism outbreaks are usually associated
withhomecannedfood,althoughoccasionallycommer-
cially canned or vacuum packed foods are responsible
for the disease. C. botulinum grows well in
non-acidic, oxygen-free environments. If food is canned
at too low heat or for too brief a time, the bacteria is not
killed. It reproduces inside the can or jar, releasing its
deadly neurotoxin. The toxin can be made harmless by
heating the contaminated food to boiling for ten min-
utes. However, even a very small amount of the
C. botulinumtoxin can cause serious illness ordeath.
Symptoms of adult botulism appear about 18–36
hours after the contaminated food is eaten, although
there are documented times of onset ranging from four
hours to eight days. Initially a person suffering from
botulism feels weakness and dizziness followed by
double vision. Symptoms progress to difficulty speak-
ing and swallowing. Paralysis moves down the body,
and when the respiratory muscles are paralyzed, death
results from asphyxiation. People who show any signs
of botulism poisoning must receive immediate emer-
gency medical care to increase their chance of survival.
Infant botulism is a form of botulism first recog-
nized in 1976. It differs from food-borne botulism in
its causes and symptoms. Infant botulism occurs when
a child under the age of one year ingests the spores of
C. botulinum. These spores are found in soil, but a
more common source of spores is honey.
Food poisoning
The C. botulinumspores lodge in the baby’s intest-
inal tract and begin to grow, producing their neuro-
toxin. Onset of symptoms is gradual. Initially the baby
is constipated. This is followed by poor feeding,
lethargy, weakness, drooling, and a distinctive wailing
cry. Eventually, the baby loses the ability to control its
head muscles. From there the paralysis progresses to
the rest of the body.
Diagnosis
One important aspect of diagnosing food poison-
ing is for doctors to determine if a number of people
have eaten the same food and show the same symp-
toms of illness. When this happens, food poisoning is
strongly suspected. The diagnosis is confirmed when
the suspected bacteria is found in astool cultureor a
fecal smear from the person. Other laboratory tests are
used to isolate bacteria from a sample of the contami-
nated food. Botulism is usually diagnosed from its
distinctive neurological symptoms, since rapid treat-
ment is essential. Many cases of food poisoning go
undiagnosed, since a definite diagnosis is not neces-
sary to effectively treat the symptoms. Because it takes
time for symptoms to develop, it is not necessarily the
most recent food one has eaten that is the cause of the
symptoms.
Treatment
Treatment of food poisoning, except that caused
by C. botulinum,focuses on preventing dehydration by
replacing fluids and electrolytes lost through vomiting
and diarrhea. Electrolytes are salts and minerals that
form electrically charges particles (ions) in body fluids.
Electrolytes are important because they control body
fluid balance and are important for all major body
reactions. Pharmacists can recommend effective, plea-
sant-tasting, electrolytically balanced replacement
fluids that are available without a prescription.
When more fluids are being lost than can be con-
sumed, dehydration may occur. Dehydration more
likely to happen in the very young, the elderly, and
people who are takingdiuretics. To prevent dehydra-
tion, a doctor may give fluids intravenously.
In very serious cases of food poisoning, medica-
tions may be given to stop abdominal cramping and
vomiting. Anti-diarrheal medications are not usually
given. Stopping the diarrhea keeps the toxins in the
body longer and may prolong the infection.
People with food poisoning should modify their
diet. During period of active vomiting and diarrhea
they should not try to eat and should drink only clear
liquids frequently but in small quantities. Once active
symptoms stop, they should eat bland, soft, easy to
digest foods for two to three days. One example is the
BRAT diet of bananas, rice, applesauce, and toast, all
of which are easy to digest. Milk products, spicy food,
alcohol and fresh fruit should be avoided for a few
days, although babies should continue to breastfeed.
These modifications are often all the treatment that is
necessary.
Severe bacterial food poisonings are sometimes
treated with antibiotics. Trimethoprim and sulfa-
methoxazole (Septra, Bactrim), ampicillin (Amcill,
Polycill) or ciprofloxacin (Ciloxan, Cipro) are most
frequently used.
Botulism is treated in a different way from other
bacterial food poisonings. Botulism antitoxin is given
to adults, but not infants, if it can be administered
within 72 hours after symptoms are first observed. If
given later, it provides no benefit.
Both infants and adults require hospitalization,
often in the intensive care unit. If the ability to breathe
is impaired, patients are put on a mechanical ventila-
tor to assist their breathing and are fed intravenously
until theparalysis passes.
Alternative treatment
Alternative practitioners offer the same advice as
traditional practitioners concerning diet modification.
In addition they recommend taking charcoal tablets,
Lactobacillus acidophilus , Lactobacillus bulgaricus ,
and citrus seed extract. An electrolyte replacement
fluid can be made at home by adding one teaspoon
of salt and four teaspoons of sugar to one quart of
water. For food poisoning other than botulism, two
homeopathic remedies, either Arsenicum album or
Nux vomica, are strongly recommended.
Prognosis
Most cases of food poisoning (except botulism)
clear up on their own within one week without medical
assistance. The ill person may continue feel tired for a
few days after active symptoms stop. So long as the ill
person does not become dehydrated, there are few
complications. Deaths are rare and usually occur in
the very young, the very old and people whose immune
systems are already weakened.
Complications of Salmonella food poisoning
include arthritis-like symptoms that occur three to
four weeks after infection. Although deaths from
Salmonella are rare, they do occur. Most deaths
1512 Food poisoning
caused bySalmonella food poisoning have occurred in
elderly people in nursing homes.
Adults usually recover without medical interven-
tion, but many children need to be hospitalized as the
result ofE. colifood poisoning.E. colitoxins may be
absorbed into the blood stream where they destroy red
blood cells and platelets. Platelets are important in
blood clotting. About 5% of victims develop hemoly-
tic-uremic syndrome which results in sudden kidney
failure and makes dialysis necessary. (Dialysis is a
medical procedure used to filter the body’s waste pro-
duct when the kidneys have failed).
Botulism is the deadliest of the bacterial food-
borne illnesses. With prompt medical care, the death
rate is less than 10%.
Prevention
Food poisoning is almost entirely preventable by
practicing good sanitation and good food handling
techniques. These include:
/C15keep hot foods hot and cold foods cold
/C15cook meat to the recommended internal tempera-
ture, use a meat thermometer to check and cook
eggs until they are no longer runny
/C15refrigerate leftovers promptly, do not let food stand
at room temperature
/C15avoid contaminating surfaces and other foods with
the juices of uncooked meats
/C15wash fruits and vegetables before using
/C15purchase pasteurized dairy products and fruit juices
/C15throw away bulging or leaking cans or any food that
smells spoiled
/C15wash hands well before and during food preparation
and after using the bathroom
/C15sanitize food preparation surfaces regularly
Resources
OTHER
U. S. Food and Drug Administration. Center for Food
Safety and Applied Nutrition.Bad Bug Book.<http://
vm.cfsan.fda.gov>.
Suzanne M. Lutwick, MPH
Foot acupressure see Reflexology
Foot care
Definition
Foot care involves all aspects of preventative and
corrective care of the foot and ankle. Doctors special-
izing in foot care are called podiatrists.
Purpose
During an average lifetime, each person walks
about 115,000 miles and three-quarters of people
have foot problems at some point in their lives.
Foot problems can arise from wearing ill-fitting
shoes, from general wear and tear, as a result of injury,
or as a complication of disease. People withdiabetes
mellitus or circulatory diseases are 20 times more likely
to have foot problems than the general public.
Podiatrists are doctors who specialize in treating the
foot and ankle. Other doctors who have experience with
foot problems are family physicians, orthopedists, sports
medicine specialists, and those who care for diabetics.
Problems with the feet include footpain, joint inflamma-
tion, plantarwarts, fungal infections (likeathlete’s foot),
nerve disorders, torn ligaments, broken bones, bacterial
infections, and tissue injuries (likefrostbite).
Precautions
People with diabetes or circulatory disorders
should be alert to even small foot problems. In these
people, a break in the skin can lead to infection,gang-
rene, andamputation.
KEY TERMS
Diuretic— Medication that increases the urine out-
put of the body.
Electrolytes— Salts and minerals that produce elec-
trically charged particles (ions) in body fluids.
Common human electrolytes are sodium chloride,
potassium, calcium, and sodium bicarbonate.
Electrolytes control the fluid balance of the body
and are important in muscle contraction, energy
generation, and almost all major biochemical reac-
tions in the body.
Lactobacillus acidophilus — This bacteria is
found in yogurt and changes the balance of the
bacteria in the intestine in a beneficial way.
Platelets— Blood cells that help the blood to clot.
Foot care