DISEASE: Hypertension
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

with an average of two to four weeks. The disease has a
slow and gradual onset, beginning with an inconspic-
uous pimple or lumpy eruption on the skin. In 90% of
patients, the initial sign of infection is in the genital
region, but a minority of patients will develop the sore
in their mouth or anal area if their sexual contact
involved those parts of the body. Many patients do
not notice the sore because it is small and not usually
painful. In some women, the first symptom of granu-
loma inguinale is bleeding from the genitals.
The initial pimple or sore is typically followed by
three stages of disease. In the first stage, the patient
develops a mass of pink or dull red granulation tissue
in the area around the anus. In the second stage, the
bacteria erode the skin to form shallow, foul-smelling
ulcers which spread from the genital and anal areas to
the thighs and lower abdomen. The edges of the ulcers
are marked by granulation tissue. In the third stage,
the ulcerated areas form deep masses of keloid or scar
tissue that may spread slowly for many years.
Patients with long-term infections are at risk for
serious complications. The ulcers in second-stage
granuloma inguinale often become superinfected
with syphilis or other STD organisms. Superinfected
ulcers become painful to touch, filled with pus and
dead tissue, and are much more difficult to treat.
There may be sizable areas of tissue destruction in
superinfected patients. In addition, the scar tissue pro-
duced by third-stage infection can grow until it closes
off parts of the patient’s urinary tract. It is also asso-
ciated with a higher risk of genitalcancer.
Diagnosis
The most important aspect of diagnosis is distin-
guishing between granuloma inguinale and other
STDs, particularly since many patients will be infected
with more than one STD. Public health officials
recommend that patients tested for granuloma ingui-
nale be given a blood test for syphilis as well. In addi-
tion, the doctor will need to distinguish between
granuloma inguinale and certain types of skin cancer,
amebiasis, fungal infections, and other bacterial
ulcers. The most significant distinguishing character-
istic of granuloma inguinale is the skin ulcer, which is
larger than in most other diseases, painless, irregular
in shape, and likely to bleed when touched.
The diagnosis of granuloma inguinale is made by
finding Donovan bodies in samples of the patient’s
skin tissue. Donovan bodies are oval rod-shaped
organisms that appear inside infected tissue cells
under a microscope. The doctor obtains a tissue sam-
ple either by cutting a piece of tissue from the edge of
an skin ulcer with a scalpel or by taking a punch
biopsy. To make a punch biopsy, the doctor will inject
a local anesthetic into an ulcerated area and remove a
piece of skin about 1/16 of an inch in size with a
surgical skin punch. The tissue sample is then air-
dried and stained with Wright’s stain, a chemical that
will cause the Donovan bodies to show up as dark
purple safety pin-shaped objects inside lighter-staining
capsules.
Treatment
Granuloma inguinale is treated with oralantibio-
tics. Three weeks of treatment with erythromycin, strep-
tomycin, or tetracycline, or 12 weeks of treatment with
ampicillin are standard forms of therapy. Although the
skin ulcers will start to show signs of healing in about a
week, the patient must take the full course of medica-
tion to minimize the possibility of relapse.
Prognosis
Most patients with granuloma inguinale recover
completely, although superinfected ulcers may require
lengthy courses of medication. Early treatment pre-
vents the complications associated with second- and
third-stage infection.
KEY TERMS
Donovan bodies— Rod-shaped oval organisms
found in tissue samples from patients with granu-
loma inguinale. Donovan bodies appear deep pur-
ple when stained with Wright’s stain.
Granulation tissue— A kind of tissue formed during
wound healing, with a rough or irregular surface
and a rich supply of blood capillaries.
Granuloma— An inflammatory swelling or growth
composed of granulation tissue, as in granuloma
inguinale.
Keloid— An unusual or abnormal growth of scar
tissue, as in the third stage of granuloma inguinale.
Punch biopsy— A method of obtaining skin samples
under local anesthesia using a surgical skin punch.
Superinfection— A condition in which a patient
with a contagious disease acquires a second infec-
tion, as when a patient with granuloma inguinale is
also infected with syphilis.
Wright’s stain— A chemical used to stain tissue
samples for laboratory analysis.
1646 Granuloma inguinale
Prevention
Prevention of granuloma inguinale has three
important aspects:
/C15Avoidance of casual sexual contacts, particularly
among homosexual males, in countries with high
rates of the disease
/C15Tracing and examination of an infected person’s
recent sexual contacts
/C15Monitoring the patient’s ulcers or scar tissue for
signs of reinfection for a period of six months after
antibiotic treatment
Resources
BOOKS
Chambers, Henry F. ‘‘Infectious Diseases: Bacterial &
Chlamydial.’’ InCurrent Medical Diagnosis and
Treatment, 1998.edited by Stephen McPhee, et al., 37th
ed. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997.
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Granulomatous ileitis see Crohn’s disease
Graves’ diseasesee Hyperthyroidism
Greenfield filter see Vena cava
Grippe see Influenza
Group A streptococcus infection see
Streptococcal infections
Group B streptococcus infection see
Streptococcal infections
Group therapy
Definition
Group therapy is a form of psychosocial treat-
ment where a small group of patients meet regularly
to talk, interact, and discuss problems with each other
and the group leader (therapist).
Purpose
Group therapy attempts to give individuals a safe
and comfortable place where they can work out pro-
blems and emotional issues. Patients gain insight into
their own thoughts and behavior, and offer sugges-
tions and support to others. In addition, patients who
have a difficult time with interpersonal relationships
can benefit from the social interactions that are a basic
part of the group therapy experience.
Precautions
Patients who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, or
in the midst of a major acute crisis are typically not
referred for group therapy until their behavior and
emotional state have stabilized. Depending on their
level of functioning, cognitively impaired patients (like
patients with organic brain disease or a traumatic
brain injury) may also be unsuitable for group therapy
intervention. Some patients with sociopathic traits are
not suitable for most groups.
Description
A psychologist, psychiatrist, social worker, or
other healthcare professional typically arranges and
conducts group therapy sessions. In some therapy
groups, two co-therapists share the responsibility of
group leadership. Patients are selected on the basis of
what they might gain from group therapy interaction
and what they can contribute to the group as a whole.
Therapy groups may be homogeneous or hetero-
geneous. Homogeneous groups have members with
similar diagnostic backgrounds (for example, they
may all suffer from depression). Heterogeneous
groups have a mix of individuals with different emo-
tional issues. The number of group members varies
widely, but is typically no more than 12. Groups may
be time limited (with a predetermined number of ses-
sions) or indefinite (where the group determines when
therapy ends). Membership may be closed or open to
new members once sessions begin.
The number of sessions in group therapy depends
on the makeup, goals, and setting of the group. For
example, a therapy group that is part of asubstance
abuse program to rehabilitate inpatients would be
called short-term group therapy. This term is used
because, as patients, the group members will only be
in the hospital for a relatively short period of time.
Long-term therapy groups may meet for six months, a
year, or longer. The therapeutic approach used in
therapy depends on the focus of the group and the
psychological training of the therapist. Some common
techniques include psychodynamic, cognitive-beha-
vioral, andGestalt therapy.
In a group therapy session, group members are
encouraged to openly and honestly discuss the issues
that brought them to therapy. They try to help other
group members by offering their own suggestions,
insights, and empathy regarding their problems.
Group therapy
There are no definite rules for group therapy, only that
members participate to the best of their ability.
However, most therapy groups do have some basic
ground rules that are usually discussed during the
first session. Patients are asked not to share what
goes on in therapy sessions with anyone outside of
the group. This protects the confidentiality of the
other members. They may also be asked not to see
other group members socially outside of therapy
because of the harmful effect it might have on the
dynamics of the group.
The therapist’s main task is to guide the group in
self-discovery. Depending on the goals of the group
and the training and style of the therapist, he or she
may lead the group interaction or allow the group to
take their own direction. Typically, the group leader
does some of both, providing direction when the group
gets off track while letting them set their own agenda.
The therapist may guide the group by simply reinfor-
cing the positive behaviors they engage in. For exam-
ple, if a group member shows empathy to another
member, or offers a constructive suggestion, the thera-
pist will point this out and explain the value of these
actions to the group. In almost all group therapy situa-
tions, the therapist will attempt to emphasize the com-
mon traits among group members so that members can
gain a sense of group identity. Group members realize
that others share the same issues they do.
The main benefit group therapy may have over
individual psychotherapy is that some patients behave
and react more like themselves in a group setting than
they would one-on-one with a therapist. The group
therapy patient gains a certain sense of identity and
social acceptance from their membership in the group.
Suddenly, they are not alone. They are surrounded by
others who have the same anxieties and emotional
issues that they have. Seeing how others deal with
these issues may give them new solutions to their
problems. Feedback from group members also offers
them a unique insight into their own behavior, and the
group provides a safe forum in which to practice new
behaviors. Lastly, by helping others in the group work
through their problems, group therapy members can
gain more self-esteem. Group therapy may also simu-
late family experiences of patients and will allow
family dynamic issues to emerge.
Group therapy is practiced in a variety of settings, including both inpatient and outpatient facilities, and is used to treat anxiety,
mood, and personality disorders as well as psychoses.(Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
1648 Group therapy
Self-help groups like Alcoholics Anonymous and
Weight Watchers fall outside of the psychotherapy
realm. These self-help groups do offer many of the
same benefits of social support, identity, and belong-
ing that make group therapy effective for many. Self-
help group members meet to discuss a common area of
concern (like alcoholism, eating disorders, bereave-
ment, parenting). Group sessions are not run by a
therapist, but by a nonprofessional leader, group
member, or the group as a whole. Self-help groups
are sometimes used in addition to psychotherapy or
regular group therapy.
Preparation
Patients are typically referred for group therapy
by a psychologist or psychiatrist. Some patients may
need individual therapy first. Before group sessions
begin, the therapist leading the session may conduct
a short intake interview with the patient to determine
if the group is right for the patient. This interview will
also allow the therapist to determine if the addition of
the patient will benefit the group. The patient may be
given some preliminary information on the group
before sessions begin. This may include guidelines for
success (like being open, listening to others, taking
risks), rules of the group (like maintaining confidenti-
ality), and educational information on what group
therapy is about.
Aftercare
The end of long-term group therapy may cause
feelings of grief, loss, abandonment, anger, or rejec-
tion in some members. The group therapist will
attempt to foster a sense of closure by encouraging
members to explore their feelings and use newly
acquired coping techniques to deal with them.
Working through this termination phase of group
therapy is an important part of the treatment process.
Risks
Some very fragile patients may not be able to
tolerate aggressive or hostile comments from group
members. Patients who have trouble communicating
in group situations may be at risk for dropping out of
group therapy. If no one comments on their silence or
makes an attempt to interact with them, they may
begin to feel even more isolated and alone instead of
identifying with the group. Therefore, the therapist
usually attempts to encourage silent members to par-
ticipate early on in treatment.
Normal results
Studies have shown that both group and indivi-
dual psychotherapy benefit about 85% of the patients
that participate in them. Optimally, patients gain a
better understanding of themselves, and perhaps a
stronger set of interpersonal and coping skills through
the group therapy process. Some patients may con-
tinue therapy after group therapy ends, either indivi-
dually or in another group setting.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street NW,
Washington DC 20005. (888) 357-7924. <http://
www.psych.org>.
American Psychological Association (APA). 750 First St.
NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242. (202) 336-5700.
<ttp://www.apa.org>.
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
Growth hormone suppression test see
Growth hormone tests
Growth hormone tests
Definition
Growth hormone (hGH), or somatotropin, is a
hormone responsible for normal body growth and
development by stimulating protein production in
muscle cells and energy release from the breakdown
of fats. Tests for growth hormone include
Somatotropin hormone test, Somatomedin C,
Growth hormone suppression test (glucose loading
KEY TERMS
Cognitive-behavioral— A therapy technique that
focuses on changing beliefs, images, and thoughts
in order to change maladjusted behaviors.
Gestalt— A humanistic therapy technique that
focuses on gaining an awareness of emotions and
behaviors in the present rather than in the past.
Psychodynamic— A therapy technique that
assumes improper or unwanted behavior is caused
by unconscious, internal conflicts and focuses on
gaining insight into these motivations.
Growth hormone tests
test), and Growth hormone stimulation test (Arginine
test or Insulin tolerance test).
Purpose
Growth hormone tests are ordered for the follow-
ing reasons:
/C15to identify growth deficiencies, including delayed
puberty and small stature in adolescents that result
from pituitary or thyroid malfunction
/C15to aid in the diagnosis of hyperpituitarism that is
evident in gigantism or acromegaly
/C15to screen for inadequate or reduced pituitary gland
function
/C15to assist in the diagnosis of pituitary tumors or
tumors related to the hypothalamus, an area of the
brain
/C15to evaluate hGH therapy
Precautions
Taking certain drugs such as amphetamines,
dopamine, corticosteroids, and phenothiazines may
increase and decrease growth hormone secretion,
respectively. Other factors influencing hGH secretion
include stress, exercise, diet, and abnormal glucose
levels. These tests should not be done within a week
of any radioactive scan.
Description
Several hormones play important roles in human
growth. The major human growth hormone (hGH), or
somatotropin, is a protein made up of 191 amino acids
that is secreted by the anterior pituitary gland and
coordinates normal growth and development. Human
growth is characterized by two spurts, one at birth and
the other at puberty. hGH plays an important role at
both of these times. Normal individuals have measur-
able levels of hGH throughout life. Yet levels of hGH
fluctuate during the day and are affected by eating and
exercise. Receptors that respond to hGH exist on cells
and tissues throughout the body. The most obvious
effect of hGH is on linear skeletal development. But
the metabolic effects of hGH on muscle, the liver, and
fat cells are critical to its function. Surprisingly, a 2004
study reported that obese people have lower-than-
normal levels of human growth hormone in their
bodies. Humans have two forms of hGH, and the
functional difference between the two is unclear. They
are both formed from the same gene, but one lacks the
amino acids in positions 32–46.
hGH is produced in the anterior portion of the
pituitary gland by somatotrophs under the control of
hormonal signals in the hypothalamus. Two hypotha-
lamic hormones regulate hGH; they are growth hor-
mone-releasing hormone (GHRH) and growth
hormone—inhibiting hormone (GHIH). When blood
glucose levels fall, GHRH triggers the secretion of
stored hGH. As blood glucose levels rise, GHRH
release is turned off. Increases in blood protein levels
trigger a similar response. As a result of this hypotha-
lamic feedback loop, hGH levels fluctuate throughout
the day. Normal plasma hGH levels average 1–3 ng/ML
with peaks as high as 60 ng/ML. In addition, plasma
glucose and amino acid availability for growth is also
regulated by the hormones adrenaline, glucagon, and
insulin.
Most hGH is released at night. Peak spikes of
hGH release occur around 10 P.M., midnight, and
2 A.M. The logic behind this night-time release is
that most of hGH’s effects are controlled by other
hormones, including the somatomedins, IGH-I and
IGH-II. As a result, the effects of hGH are spread
out more evenly during the day.
A number of hormonal conditions can lead to
excessive or diminished growth. Because of its critical
role in producing hGH and other hormones, an
abnormal pituitary gland will often yield altered
growth. Dwarfism (very small stature) can be due to
underproduction of hGH, lack of IGH-I, or a flaw in
target tissue response to either of these growth hor-
mones. Overproduction of hGH or IGH-I, or an exag-
gerated response to these hormones can lead to
gigantism or acromegaly, both of which are character-
ized by a very large stature.
Gigantism is the result of hGH overproduction in
early childhood leading to a skeletal height up to 8 feet
(2.5m) or more. Acromegaly results when hGH is
overproduced after the onset of puberty. In this con-
dition, the epiphyseal plates of the long bone of the
body do not close, and they remain responsive to
additional stimulated growth by hGH. This disorder
is characterized by an enlarged skull, hands and feet,
nose, neck, and tongue.
Somatotropin
Somatotropin is used to identify hGH deficiency
in adolescents with short stature, delayed sexual
maturity, and other growth deficiencies. It also
aids in documenting excess hGH production that is
responsible for gigantism or acromegaly, and confirms
underactivity or overproduction of the pituitary gland
(hypopituitarism or hyperpituitarism). However, due
1650 Growth hormone tests
to the episodic secretion of hGH, as well as hGH
production in response to stress, exercise, or other
factors, random assays are not an adequate determi-
nation of hGH deficiency. To negate these variables
and obtain more accurate readings, a blood sample
can be drawn one to 1.5 hours after sleep (hGH levels
increase during sleep), or strenuous exercise can be
performed for 30 minutes before blood is drawn
(hGH levels increase after exercise). The hGH levels
at the end of an exercise period are expected to be
maximal.
Somatomedin C
The somatomedin C test is usually ordered to
detect pituitary abnormalities, hGH deficiency, and
acromegaly. Also called insulin-like growth factor
(IGF-1), somatomedin C is considered a more accu-
rate reflection of the blood concentration of hGH
because such variables as time of day, activity levels,
or diet do not influence the results. Somatomedin C is
part of a group of peptides, called somatomedins,
through which hGH exerts its effects. Because it cir-
culates in the bloodstream bound to long-lasting pro-
teins, it is more stable than hGH. Levels of
somatomedin C depend on hGH levels, however. As
a result, somatomedin C levels are low when hGH
levels are deficient. Abnormally low test results of
somatomedin C require an abnormally reduced or
absent hGH during an hGH stimulation test in order
to diagnose hGH deficiency. Nonpituitary causes of
reduced somatomedin C includemalnutrition, severe
chronic illness, severe liver disease, hypothyroidism,
and Laron’s dwarfism.
Growth hormone stimulation test
The hGH stimulation test, also called hGH
Provocation test, Insulin Tolerance, or Arginine test,
is performed to test the body’s ability to produce
human growth hormone, and to identify suspected
hGH deficiency. A normal patient can have low
hGH levels, but if hGH is still low after stimulation,
a diagnosis can be more accurately made.
Insulin-induced hypoglycemia (via intravenous
injection of insulin) stimulates hGH and corticotropin
secretion as well. If such stimulation is unsuccessful,
then there is a malfunction of the anterior pituitary
gland. Blood samples may be obtained following an
energetic exercise session lasting 20 minutes.
A substance called hGH-releasing factor has
recently been used for hGH stimulation. This
approach promises to be more accurate and specific
for hGH deficiency caused by the pituitary. Growth
hormone deficiency is also suspected when x ray deter-
mination of bone age indicates retarded growth in
comparison to chronologic age. At present, the best
method to identify hGH-deficient patients is a positive
stimulation test followed by a positive response to a
therapeutic trial of hGH.
Growth hormone suppression test
Also called the glucose loading test, this procedure
is used to evaluate excessive baseline levels of human
growth hormone, and to confirm diagnosis of gigant-
ism in children and acromegaly in adults. The proce-
dure requires two different blood samples, one drawn
before the administration of 100 g of glucose (by
mouth), and a second sample two hours after glucose
ingestion.
Normally, a glucose load suppresses hGH secre-
tion. In a patient with excessive hGH levels, failure of
suppression indicates anterior pituitary dysfunction
and confirms a diagnosis of acromegaly and
gigantism.
Preparation
Somatotropin: This test requires a blood sam-
ple. The patient should befasting (nothing to eat or
drink from midnight the night before the test).
Stress and/or exercise increases hGH levels, so the
patient should be at complete rest for 30 minutes
before the blood sample is drawn. If the physician
has requested two samples, they should be drawn
on consecutive days at approximately the same
time on both days, preferably between 6
A.M.a n d
8 A.M.
Somatomedin C: This test requires a blood sam-
ple. The patient should have nothing to eat or drink
from midnight the night before the test.
Growth hormone stimulation: This test requires
intravenous administration of medications and the
withdrawal of frequent blood samples, which are
obtained at 0, 60, and 90 minutes after injection of
arginine and/or insulin. The patient should have noth-
ing to eat or drink after midnight the night before
the test.
Growth hormone suppression: This test
requires two blood samples, one before the test
and another two hours after administration of 100 g
of glucose solution by mouth. The patient should
have nothing to eat or drink after midnight, and
physical activity should be limited for 10–12 hours
before the test.
Growth hormone tests
Risks
Growth hormone stimulation: Only minor dis-
comfort is associated with this test, and results from
the insertion of the IV line and the low blood sugar
(hypoglycemia) induced by the insulin injection. Some
patients may experience sleepiness, sweating and/or
nervousness, all of which can be corrected after the
test by ingestion of cookies, juice, or a glucose infu-
sion. Severe cases of hypoglycemia may cause ketosis
(excessive amounts of fatty acid byproducts in the
body), acidosis (a disturbance of the body’s acid-base
balance), or shock. With the close observation
required for the test, these are unlikely.
Growth hormone suppression: Some patients
experience nausea after the administration of this
amount of glucose. Ice chips can alleviate this
symptom.
Normal results
Normal results may vary from laboratory to
laboratory but are usually within the following ranges:
Somatotropin:
/C15men: 5 ng/ml
/C15women: less than 10 ng/ml
/C15children: 0–10 ng/ml
/C15newborn: 10–40 ng/ml.
Somatomedin C:
/C15adult: 42–110 ng/ml
/C15Child:
/C150–8 years: Girls 7–110 ng/ml; Boys 4–87 ng/ml
/C159–10 years: Girls 39–186 ng/ml; Boys 26–98 ng/ml
/C1511–13 years: Girls 66–215 ng/ml; Boys 44–207 ng/ml
/C1514–16 years: Girls 96–256 ng/ml; Boys 48 255 ng/ml.
Growth hormone stimulation: greater than
10 ng/ml.
Growth hormone suppression: Normally, glucose
suppresses hGH to levels of undetectable to 3 ng/ml in
30 minutes to two hours. In children, rebound stimu-
lation may occur after two to five hours.
Abnormal results
Somatotropin hormone: Excess hGH is responsi-
ble for the syndromes of gigantism and acromegaly.
Excess secretion is stimulated by anorexia nervosa,
stress, hypoglycemia, and exercise. Decreased levels
are seen in hGH deficiency, dwarfism, hyperglycemia,
failure to thrive, and delayed sexual maturity.
Somatomedin C: Increased levels contribute to
the syndromes of gigantism and acromegaly. Stress,
major surgery, hypoglycemia,starvation, and exercise
stimulate hGH secretion, which in turn stimulates
somatomedin C.
Growth hormone stimulation: Decreased levels
are seen in pituitary deficiency and hGH deficiency.
Diseases of the pituitary can result in failure of the
pituitary to secrete hGH and/or all the pituitary hor-
mones. As a result, the hGH stimulation test will fail to
stimulate hGH secretion.
Growth hormone suppression: The acromegaly
syndrome elevates base hGH levels to 75 ng/ml,
which in turn are not suppressed to less than 5 ng/ml
during the test. Excess hGH secretion may cause
unchanged or rising hGH levels in response to glucose
loading, confirming a diagnosis of acromegaly or
KEY TERMS
Acromegaly— A rare disease resulting from exces-
sive growth hormone caused by a benign tumor. If
such a tumor develops within the first 10 years of
life, the result is gigantism (in which growth is
accelerated) and not acromegaly. Symptoms
include coarsening of the facial features, enlarge-
ment of the hands, feet, ears, and nose, jutting of
the jaw, and a long face.
Dwarfism, pituitary— Short stature. When caused
by inadequate amounts of growth hormone (as
opposed to late growth spurt or genetics), hGH
deficiency results in abnormally slow growth and
short stature with normal proportions.
Gigantism— Excessive growth, especially in
height, resulting from overproduction during child-
hood or adolescence of growth hormone by a pitui-
tary tumor. Untreated, the tumor eventually
destroys the pituitary gland, resulting in death dur-
ing early adulthood. If the tumor develops after
growth has stopped, the result is acromegaly, not
gigantism.
Pituitary gland— The pituitary is the most impor-
tant of the endocrine glands (glands that release
hormones directly into the bloodstream).
Sometimes referred to as the ‘‘master gland,’’ the
pituitary regulates and controls the activities of
other endocrine glands and many body processes.
1652 Growth hormone tests
gigantism. In such cases, verification of results is
required by repeating the test after a one-day rest.
Resources
PERIODICALS
‘‘Weight-loss Hormone.’’Better Nutrition(May 2004): 32.
Janis O. Flores
Teresa G. Odle
G6PD deficiency see Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase deficiency
Guaifenesin see Expectorants
Guided imagery
Definition
Guided imagery is the use of relaxation and men-
tal visualization to improve mood and/or physical
well-being.
Purpose
The connection between the mind and physical
health has been well documented and extensively stu-
died. Positive mental imagery can promote relaxation
and reducestress, improve mood, control high blood
pressure, alleviatepain, boost the immune system, and
lower cholesterol and blood sugar levels. Through
guided imagery techniques, patients can learn to con-
trol functions normally controlled by the autonomic
nervous system, such as heart rate, blood pressure,
respiratory rate, and body temperature.
One of the biggest benefits of using guided ima-
gery as a therapeutic tool is its availability. Imagery
can be used virtually anywhere, anytime. It is also an
equal opportunity therapy. Although some initial
training in the technique may be required, guided
imagery is accessible to virtually everyone regardless
of economic status, education, or geographical
location.
Guided imagery also gives individuals a sense of
empowerment, or control. The technique is induced by
a therapist who guides the patient. The resulting men-
tal imagery used is solely a product of the individual’s
imagination. Some individuals have difficulty imagin-
ing. They may not get actual clear images but perhaps
vague feelings about the guided journey. However
these individuals’ brains and nervous systems
responses seem to be the same as those with more
detailed imaginings.
Patients who feel uncomfortable ‘‘opening up’’ in
a traditional therapist-patient session may feel more at
ease with a self-directed therapy like guided imagery.
Description
Guided imagery is simply the use of one’s imagi-
nation to promote mental and physical health. It can
be self-directed, where the individual puts himself into
a relaxed state and creates his own images, or directed
by others. When directed by others, an individual
listens to a therapist, video, or audiotapedexercise
that leads him through a relaxation and imagery exer-
cise. Some therapists also use guided imagery in group
settings.
Guided imagery is a two-part process. The first
component involves reaching a state of deep relaxa-
tion through breathing and muscle relaxation techni-
ques. During the relaxation phase, the person closes
her eyes and focuses on the slow, in and out sensation
of breathing. Or, she might focus on releasing the
feelings of tension from her muscles, starting with the
toes and working up to the top of the head. Relaxation
tapes often feature soft music or tranquil, natural
sounds such as rolling waves and chirping birds in
order to promote feelings of relaxation.
Once complete relaxation is achieved, the second
component of the exercise is the imagery, or visualiza-
tion, itself. There are a number of different types of
guided imagery techniques, limited only by the imagi-
nation. Some commonly used types include relaxation
imagery, healing imagery, pain control imagery, and
mental rehearsal.
Relaxation imagery
Relaxation imagery involves conjuring up plea-
sant, relaxing images that rest the mind and body.
These may be experiences that have already happened,
or new situations.
Healing imagery
Patients coping with diseases and injuries can
imagine cancer cells dying, wounds healing, and the
body mending itself. Or, patients may picture them-
selves healthy, happy, and symptom-free. Another
healing imagery technique is based on the idea ofqi,
or energy flow, an idea borrowed fromtraditional
Chinese medicine . Chinese medicine practitioners
believe that illness is the result of a blockage or slowing
of energy flow in the body. Individuals may use guided
Guided imagery
imagery to imagine energy moving freely throughout
the body as a metaphor for good health.
Pain control imagery
Individuals can control pain through several ima-
gery techniques. One method is to produce a mental
image of the pain and then transform that image into
something less frightening and more manageable.
Another is to imagine the pain disappearing, and the
patient as completely pain-free. Or, one may imagine
the pain as something over which he has complete
control. For example, patients with back problems
may imagine their pain as a high voltage electric cur-
rent surging through their spine. As they use guided
imagery techniques, they can picture themselves
reaching for an electrical switch and turning down
the power on the current to alleviate the pain.
Mental rehearsal
Mental rehearsal involves imagining a situation or
scenario and its ideal outcome. It can be used to reduce
anxiety about an upcoming situation, such as labor
and delivery, surgery, or even a critical life event such
as an important competition or a job interview.
Individuals picture themselves going through each
step of the anxiety-producing event and then success-
fully completing it.
Preparations
For a successful guided imagery session, indivi-
duals should select a quiet, relaxing location where
there is a comfortable place to sit or recline. If the
guided imagery session is to be prompted with an
audiotape or videotape, a stereo, VCR, or portable
tape player should be available. Some people find that
quiet background music improves their imagery
sessions.
The session, which can last anywhere from a few
minutes to an hour, should be uninterrupted. Taking
the phone off the hook and asking family members for
solitude can ensure a more successful and relaxing
session.
Imagery combined with other relaxation techni-
ques such as yoga, massage, or aromatherapy can
greatly enhance the effects of these therapies. It can
be done virtually anywhere.
Precautions
Because of the state of extreme relaxation
involved in guided imagery, individuals should never
attempt to use guided imagery while driving or oper-
ating heavy machinery.
Side effects
Guided imagery can induce sleepiness, and some
individuals may fall asleep during a session. Other
than this, there are no known adverse side effects to
guided imagery.
Research and general acceptance
Use of guided imagery is a widely accepted
practice among mental healthcare providers and is
gaining acceptance as a powerful pain control tool
across a number of medical disciplines. Results of
a study conducted at The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation and published in 1999 found that car-
diac surgery patients who used a guided imagery
tape prior to surgery experienced less pain and
anxiety. These patients also left the hospital earlier
following surgery than patients who used pain
medication only.
Another study conducted by Harvard Medical
School researchers found that for more than 200
patients undergoing invasive vascular or renal surgery,
guided imagery controlled pain and anxiety more
effectively than medication alone.
Resources
BOOKS
Battino, Rubin.Guided Imagery and Other Approaches to
Healing. Carmarthen, United Kingdom: Crown House
Publishing, 2000.
PERIODICALS
Lang, Elvira, et al. ‘‘Adjunctive non-pharmacological
analgesia for invasive medical procedures: a rando-
mized trial.’’The Lancet.355, no. 9214, (April 2000):
1486-1490.
KEY TERMS
Aromatherapy— The therapeutic use of plant-
derived, aromatic essential oils to promote physical
and psychological well-being.
Autonomic nervous system— The part of the ner-
vous system that controls so-called involuntary
functions such as heart rate, salivary gland
secretion, respiratory function, and pupil
dilation.
1654 Guided imagery
ORGANIZATIONS
The Academy for Guided Imagery. P.O. Box 2070, Mill
Valley, CA 94942. (800) 726-2070.
OTHER
Brennan, Patricia. ‘‘Stress First Aid Kit.’’ (Guided imagery
audiotape set.) Available from Inside Out Publishing at
(888) 727-3296 or <http://www.facingthedawn.com>.
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
Guillain-Barre´ syndrome
Definition
Guillain-Barre´ syndrome (GBS) causes progres-
sive muscle weakness and paralysis (the complete
inability to use a particular muscle or muscle group),
which develops over days or up to four weeks, and
lasts several weeks or even months.
Description
The classic scenario in GBS involves a patient who
has just recovered from a typical, seemingly uncom-
plicated viral infection. Symptoms of muscle weakness
appear one to four weeks later. The most common
preceding infections are cytomegalovirus, herpes,
Epstein-Barr virus, and viral hepatitis. A gastrointest-
inal infection with the bacteriaCampylobacter jejuniis
also common and may cause a severe type of GBS
from which it is particularly difficult to recover.
About 5% of GBS patients have a surgical procedure
as a preceding event. Patients with lymphoma,sys-
temic lupus erythematosus,o r AIDS have a higher
than normal risk of GBS. Other GBS patients have
recently received an immunization, while still others
have no known preceding event. In 1976–77, there was
a vastly increased number of GBS cases among people
who had been recently vaccinated against the Swine
flu. The reason for this phenomenon has never been
identified, and no other flu vaccine has caused such an
increase in GBS cases.
Causes and symptoms
The cause of the weakness and paralysis of GBS is
the loss of myelin, which is the material that coats
nerve cells (the loss of myelin is called demyelination).
Myelin is an insulating substance which is wrapped
around nerves in the body, serving to speed conduc-
tion of nerve impulses. Without myelin, nerve
conduction slows or stops. GBS has a short, severe
course. It causes inflammation and destruction of the
myelin sheath, and it disturbs multiple nerves.
Therefore, it is considered an acute inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy.
The reason for the destruction of myelin in GBS is
unknown, although it is thought that the underlying
problem is autoimmune in nature. An autoimmune
disorder is one in which the body’s immune system,
trained to fight against such foreign invaders as viruses
and bacteria, somehow becomes improperly pro-
grammed. The immune system becomes confused,
and is not able to distinguish between foreign invaders
and the body itself. Elements of the immune system
are unleashed against areas of the body, resulting in
damage and destruction. For some reason, in the case
of GBS, the myelin sheath appears to become a target
for the body’s own immune system.
The first symptoms of GBS consist of muscle
weakness (legs first, then arms, then face), accompa-
nied by prickly, tingling sensations (paresthesias).
Symptoms affect both sides of the body simulta-
neously, a characteristic that helps distinguish GBS
from other causes of weakness and paresthesias.
Normal reflexes are first diminished, then lost. The
weakness eventually affects all the voluntary mus-
cles, resulting in paralysis. When those muscles
necessary for breathing become paralyzed, the
patient must be placed on a mechanical ventilator
which takes over the function of breathing. This
occurs about 30% of the time. Very severely ill
GBS patients may have complications stemming
from other nervous systemabnormalities which can
result in problems with fluid balance in the body,
severely fluctuating blood pressure, and heart
rhythm irregularities.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of GBS is made by looking for a parti-
cular cluster of symptoms (progressively worse muscle
weakness and then paralysis), and by examining the
fluid that bathes the brain and spinal canal through
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis . This fluid is
obtained by inserting a needle into the lower back
(lumbar region). When examined in a laboratory, the
CSF of a GBS patient will reveal a greater-than-nor-
mal quantity of protein, with normal numbers of white
blood cells and a normal amount of sugar.
Electrodiagnostic studies may show slowing or block
of conduction in nerve endings in parts of the body
other than the brain. Minor abnormalities will be pre-
sent in 90% of patients.
Guillain-Barre´ syndrome
Treatment
There is no direct treatment for GBS. Instead,
treatments are used that support the patient with the
disabilities caused by the disease. The progress of
paralysis must be carefully monitored, in order to
provide mechanical assistance for breathing if it
becomes necessary. Careful attention must also be
paid to the amount of fluid the patient is taking in by
drinking and eliminating by urinating. Blood pres-
sure, heart rate, and heart rhythm also must be
monitored.
A procedure called plasmapheresis, performed
early in the course of GBS, has been shown to shorten
the course and severity of GBS. Plasmapheresis con-
sists of withdrawing the patient’s blood, passing it
through an instrument that separates the different
types of blood cells, and returning all the cellular
components (red and white blood cells and platelets)
along with either donor plasma or a manufactured
replacement solution. This is thought to rid the
blood of the substances that are attacking the patient’s
myelin.
It has also been shown that the use of high doses of
immunoglobulin given intravenously (by drip through
a needle in a vein) may be just as helpful as plasma-
pheresis. Immunoglobulin is a substance naturally
manufactured by the body’s immune system in
response to various threats. It is interesting to note
that corticosteroid medications (such as prednisone),
often the mainstay of anti-autoimmune disease treat-
ment, are not only unhelpful, but may in fact be harm-
ful to patients with GBS.
Prognosis
About 85% of GBS patients make reasonably
good recoveries. However, 30% of adult patients,
and a greater percentage of children, never fully regain
their previous level of muscle strength. Some of these
patients suffer from residual weakness, others from
permanent paralysis. About 10% of GBS patients
begin to improve, then suffer a relapse. These patients
suffer chronic GBS symptoms. About 5% of all GBS
patients die, most from cardiac rhythm disturbances.
Patients with certain characteristics tend to have a
worse outcome. These include people of older age,
those who required breathing support with a mechan-
ical ventilator, and those who had their worst symp-
toms within the first seven days.
Prevention
Because so little is known about what causes GBS
to develop, there are no known methods of
prevention.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Neurology. 1080 Montreal Ave.,
St. Paul, MN 55116. (612) 695-1940. <http://
www.aan.com>.
Guillain-Barre´ Syndrome Foundation International. PO
Box 262, Wynnewood, PA 19096. (610) 667-0131. (610)
667-0131. <http://www.webmast.com/gbs>.
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
Guinea worm infection
Definition
Infection occurs when the parasitic guinea worm
resides within the body. Infection is not apparent until
a pregnant female worm prepares to expel embryos.
The infection is rarely fatal, but the latter stage is
painful. The infection is also referred to as dracuncu-
liasis, and less commonly as dracontiasis.
Description
Before the early 1980s, guinea worms infected
10–15 million people annually in central Africa and
parts of Asia. By 1996, worldwide incidence of infec-
tion fell to fewer than 153,000 cases per year.
KEY TERMS
Autoimmune— The body’s immune system direc-
ted against the body itself.
Demyelination— Disruption or destruction of the
myelin sheath, leaving a bare nerve. Results in a
slowing or stopping of impulses traveling along
that nerve.
Inflammatory— Having to do with inflammation,
the body’s response to either invading foreign sub-
stances (such as viruses or bacteria) or to direct
injury of body tissue.
Myelin— The substance that is wrapped around
nerves, and which is responsible for speed and
efficiency of impulses traveling through those
nerves.
1656 Guinea worm infection
Complete eradication of guinea worm infection is a
goal of international water safety programs.
To survive, guinea worms require three things:
water during the embryo stage, an intermediate host
during early maturation, and a human host during
adulthood. In bodies of water, such as ponds, guinea
worm embryos are eaten by tiny, lobster-like water
fleas. Once ingested, the embryos mature into larvae.
Humans become hosts by consuming water con-
taining infected water fleas. Once in the human intes-
tine, larvae burrow into surrounding tissue. After
three to four, the worms mate. Males die soon after,
but pregnant females continue to grow. As adults,
each threadlike worm can be three feet long and har-
bor three million embryos. More than one guinea
worm can infect a person at the same time.
About eight months later, the female prepares to
expel mature embryos by migrating toward the skin
surface. Until this point, most people are unaware that
they are infected. Extremepain occurs as the worm
emerges from under the skin, often around the infected
person’s ankle. The pain is temporarily relieved by
immersing the area in water, an act that contaminates
the water and starts the cycle again.
Causes and symptoms
Dracunculus medinensis, or guinea worm, causes
infection. Symptoms are commonly absent until a
pregnant worm prepares to expel embryos. By secret-
ing an irritating chemical, the worm causes a blister to
form on the skin surface. This chemical also causes
nausea, vomiting, dizziness, anddiarrhea. The blister is
accompanied by a burning, stabbing pain and can
form anywhere on the body; but, the usual site is the
lower leg or foot. Once the blister breaks, an open sore
remains until the worm has expelled all the embryos.
Diagnosis
Guinea worm infection is identified by the
symptoms.
Treatment
Most people infected with guinea worm rely on
traditional medicine. The worm is extracted by gently
and gradually pulling the worm out and winding it
around a small strip of wood. Surgical removal is
possible, but rarely done in rural areas. Extraction is
complemented by herbs and oils to treat the wound
site. Such treatment can ease extraction and may help
prevent secondary infections.
Modern medicine offers safe surgical removal of
the guinea worm, and drug therapy can prevent infec-
tion and pain. Using drugs to combat the worms has
had mixed results.
Prognosis
If the worm is completely removed, the wound
heals in approximately two to four weeks.
However, if a worm emerges from a sensitive
area, such as the sole of a foot, or if several
worms are involved, healing requires more time.
Recovery is also complicated if the worm breaks
during extraction. Serious secondary infections fre-
quently occur in such situations. There is the risk
of permanent disability in some cases, and having
one guinea worm infection does not confer immu-
nity against future infections.
Prevention
Guinea worn infection is prevented by disrupting
transmission. Wells and other protected water sources
are usually safe from being contaminated with worm
embryos. In open water sources, poisons may be used
to kill water fleas. Otherwise, water must be boiled or
filtered.
Resources
OTHER
World Health Organization. June 7, 1998. <http://
www.who.int/home-page/index.en.shtml>.
Julia Barrett
KEY TERMS
Guinea worm embryo— The guinea worm at its ear-
liest life stage prior to or shortly after being expelled
from an adult female worm.
Guinea worm larvae— The guinea worm during its
middle life stage as it matures within a water flea.
The larvae can only grow to adulthood within a
human host.
Host— With regard to guinea worm infection, either
the water flea or human from which the worm gets
nourishment and shelter as it matures.
Secondary infection— An illness–typically caused
by bacteria–that follows from a guinea worm
infection.
Guinea worm infection
Gulf War syndrome
Definition
Gulf War syndrome describes a wide spectrum of
illnesses and symptoms ranging fromasthma to sexual
dysfunction that have been reported by U.S. and U.S.
allied soldiers who served in the Persian Gulf War in
1990–1991.
Description
Between 1994 and 1999, 145 federally funded
research studies on Gulf War-related illnesses were
undertaken at a cost of over $133 million. Despite
this investment and the data collected from over
100,000 veterans who have registered with the
Department of Defense (DOD) and/or Veterans
Administration (VA) as having Gulf War-related ill-
nesses, there is still much debate over the origin and
nature of Gulf War syndrome. As of early 2001, the
DOD has failed to establish a definite cause for the
disorder. Veterans who have the illness experience a
wide range of debilitating symptoms that elude a sin-
gle diagnosis. Common symptoms include fatigue,
trouble breathing, headaches, disturbed sleep, mem-
ory loss, and lack of concentration. Similar experi-
ences among Gulf War veterans have been reported
in the United Kingdom and Canada.
Causes and symptoms
There is much current debate over a possible causa-
tive agent for Gulf War syndrome other than thestress
of warfare. Intensive efforts by the Veterans
Administrationandotherpublicandprivateinstitutions
have investigated a wide range of potential factors.
These include chemical and biological weapons, the
immunizations and preventive treatments used to pro-
tect against them, smoke from oil well fires, exposure to
depleted uranium, and diseases endemic to the Arabian
peninsula. So far investigators have not approached a
consensus. In its final report released in December 2000,
the Presidential Special Oversight Board for
Department of Defense Investigations of Gulf War
Chemical and Biological Incidents cited combat stress
as a possible causative factor, but called for further
research. There is also a likelihood that U.S. and allied
forces were exposed to low levels of sarin and/or cyclo-
sarin (nerve gases) released during the destruction of
Iraqi munitions at Kharnisiyah, Iraq, and that these
chemicals might be linked to the syndrome. In July
1997, the VA informed approximately 100,000 U.S. ser-
vicemen of their possible exposure to the nerve agents.
In October 1999, the U.S. Pentagon released a
report that hypothesized that an experimental drug
known as pyriostigmine bromide (PB) might be linked
to the physical symptoms manifested in Gulf War
Syndrome. The experimental drug was given to U.S.
and Canadian troops during the war to protect
soldiers against the effects of the chemical nerve
agent soman. It has also been suggested that botuli-
num toxoid andanthrax vaccinations administered to
soldiers during the conflict may be responsible for
some manifestations of the syndrome.
Some studies have shown that Gulf War veterans
have a higher incidence of positive tests for
Mycoplasma fermentans, a bacteria, in their blood-
stream. However, other clinical studies have not
found a link between the bacterial infection and Gulf
War-related illnesses.
Statistical analysis tells us that the following
symptoms are about twice as likely to appear in Gulf
War veterans than in their non-combat peers: depres-
sion, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), chronic
fatigue, cognitive dysfunction (diminished ability to
calculate, order thoughts, evaluate, learn, and remem-
ber), bronchitis, asthma,fibromyalgia, alcoholabuse,
anxiety, and sexual discomfort. PTSD is the modern
equivalent of shell shock (World War I) and battle
fatigue (World War II). It encompasses most of the
psychological symptoms of war veterans, including
nightmares, panic at sudden loud noises, and inability
to adjust to peacetime living.Chronic fatigue syndrome
has a specific medical definition that attempts to sepa-
rate common fatigue from a more disabling illness in
hope of finding a specific cause. Fibromyalgia is
another newly defined syndrome, and as such it has
arbitrarily rigid defining characteristics. These include
a certain duration of illness, a specified minimum
number of joint and musclepain located in designated
areas of the body, sleep disturbances, and other asso-
ciated symptoms and signs.
Researchers have identified three distinct syn-
dromes and several variations in Gulf War veterans.
Type one patients suffer primarily from impaired
thinking. Type two patients have a greater degree of
confusion and ataxia (loss of coordination). Type
three patients were the most affected by joint pains,
muscle pains, and extremity paresthesias (unnatural
sensations like burning or tingling in the arms and
legs). In each of the three types, researchers found
different but measurable impairments on objective
testing of neurological function. The business of the
nervous system is much more complex and subtle than
other body functions. Measuring it requires equally
complex effort. The tests used in this study carefully
1658 Gulf War syndrome
measured and compared localized nerve performance
at several different tasks against the same values in
normal subjects. Brain wave response to noise and
touch, eye muscle response to spinning, and caloric
testing (stimulation of the ear with warm and cold
water, which causes vertigo) were clearly different
between the normal and the test subjects. The
researchers concluded that there was ‘‘a generalized
injury to the nervous system.’’ Another research group
concluded their study by stating that there was ‘‘a
spectrum of neurologic injury involving the central,
peripheral, and autonomic nervous systems.’’
Diagnosis
Until there is a clear definition of the disease,
diagnosis is primarily anexercise in identifying those
Gulf War veterans who have undefined illness in an
effort to learn more about them and their symptoms.
Both the Department of Defense and the Veterans
Administration currently have programs devoted to
this problem. Both the DOD’s Comprehensive
Clinical Evaluation Program and the VA’s Persian
Gulf Registry provide free, in-depth medical evalua-
tions to Gulf War veterans and their families. In addi-
tion to providing individual veterans with critical
medical care, these organizations use the cumulative
data from these programs to advance research on Gulf
War Syndrome itself.
Treatment
Specific treatment awaits specific diagnosis and
identification of a causative agent. Meanwhile, veter-
ans can benefit from the wide variety of supportive
and non-specific approaches to this and similar pro-
blems. There are many drugs available for sympto-
matic relief. Psychological counseling by those
specializing in this area can be immensely beneficial,
even life-saving for those contemplating suicide.
Veterans’ benefits are available for those who are
impaired by their symptoms.
Alternative treatment
The symptoms can be worked with using many
modalities of alternative health care. The key to work-
ing successfully with people living their lives with Gulf
War syndrome is long-term, ongoing care, whether it
be hypnotherapy, acupuncture, homeopathy,nutrition,
vitamin/mineral therapy, or bodywork.
Experimental treatment withantibiotics is advo-
cated by some healthcare professionals who believe
that Gulf War illness is related to a Mycoplasma
fermentans bacterial infection. However, a conclusive
link has not been clinically proven.
Prognosis
The outlook for Persian Gulf War veterans is
unclear, but will hopefully improve as more informa-
tion is gathered about the illness. Gradual return to a
functioning life may take many years of work and
much help. It is important to note that even in the
absence of an identifiable and curable cause, recovery
is possible.
Resources
BOOKS
Wheelwright, Jeff.The Irritable Heart.New York: W.W.
Norton & Co., 2001.
ORGANIZATIONS
The American Legion. Gulf War Veteran Issues. <http://
www.legion.org/gulftoc.htm>.
Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses. 5113
Leesburg Pike, Suite 901, Falls Church, VA, 22041.
(703) 578-8518. <http://www.gulflink.osd.mil>.
U.S. Department of Defense. Comprehensive Clinical
Evaluation Program (CCEP). (800) 796-9699.
Veterans Administration. Persian Gulf Medical Information
Helpline. 400 South 18th Street, St. Louis, Missouri
63103-2271. (800)749-8387.
KEY TERMS
Ataxia— Lack of coordination.
Caloric testing— Flushing warm and cold water
into the ear stimulates the labyrinth and causes
vertigo and nystagmus if all the nerve pathways
are intact.
Endemic— Always there.
Paresthesia— An altered sensation often described
as burning, tingling, or pin pricks.
Syndrome— Common features of a disease or fea-
tures that appear together often enough to suggest
they may represent a single, as yet unknown, dis-
ease entity. When a syndrome is first identified, an
attempt is made to define it as strictly as possible,
even to the exclusion of some cases, in order to
separate out a pure enough sample to study. This
process is most likely to identify a cause, a positive
method of diagnosis, and a treatment. Later on, less
typical cases can be considered.
Gulf War syndrome