DISEASE: Iron Deficiency Anemia
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

research on medicinal herbs found in Europe, Persia,
India, and the Far East. Arab businessmen opened the
first herbal pharmacies early in the ninth century. The
Leech Book of Bald, the work of a Christian monk, was
compiled in the tenth century. It preserved important
medical writings that had survived from the work of
physicians in ancient Greece and Rome.
The Middle Ages in Europe were a time of wide-
spread death by plagues and pestilence. The Black
Plague of 1348, particularly, and other health catas-
trophes in later years, claimed so many lives that
survivors began to lose faith in the dominant Galenic
medical system. Fortunately, the knowledge of tradi-
tional herbal medicine had not been lost. Medieval
monks who cultivated extensive medicinal gardens
on the monastery grounds, also patiently copied the
ancient herbal and medical texts. Folk medicine as
practiced in Europe by traditional healers persisted,
even though many women herbalists were persecuted
as witches and enemies of the Catholic church and
their herbal arts were suppressed.
The growing spice trade and explorations to the
New World introduced exotic plants, and a whole new
realm of botanical medicines became available to
Europeans. Following the invention of the printing
press in the fifteenth century, a large number of herbal
texts, also simply called herbals, became available
for popular use. Among them were the beautifully
illustrated works of the German botanists Otto
Brunfels and Leonhard Fuchs published in 1530, and
the Dutch herbal of Belgian physician Rembert
Dodoens, a popular work that was later reproduced
in English. In 1597, the physician and gardener John
Gerard published one of the most famous of the
English herbals, still in print today. Gerard’s herbal,
known asThe Herball or General Historie of Plantes
was not an original work. Much of the content
was taken from the translated text of his Belgian
predecessor Dodoens. Gerard did, however, include
descriptions of some of the more than one thousand
species of rare and exotic plants and English flora
from his own garden.
The correspondence of astrology with herbs was
taught by Arab physicians who regarded astrology as
a science helpful in the selection of medicines and in
the treatment of diseases. This approach to western
herbalism was particularly evident in the herbal texts
published in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
One of the most popular and controversial English
herbals is The English Physician Enlargedpublished
in 1653. The author, Nicholas Culpeper, was an
apothecary by trade. He also published a translation
of the Latin language London Pharmacopoeia into
English. Culpeper was a nonconformist in loyalist
England, and was determined to make medical knowl-
edge more accessible to the apothecaries, the trades-
men who prescribed most of the herbal remedies.
Culpeper’s herbal was criticized by the medical estab-
lishment for its mix of magic and astrology with
botanical medicine, but it became one of the most
popular compendiums of botanical medicine of its
day. Culpeper also accepted the so-called ‘‘Doctrine
of Signatures,’’ practiced by medieval monks in their
medicinal gardens. This theory teaches that the
appearance of plants is the clue to their curative
powers. Plants were chosen for treatment of particular
medical conditions based on their associations with
the four natural elements and with a planet or sign.
The place where the plant grows, its dominant physi-
cal feature, and the smell and taste of an herb deter-
mined the plant’s signature. Culpeper’s herbal is still
in print in facsimile copies, and some pharmocogno-
sists and herbalists in the twenty-first century voice
the same criticisms that Culpeper’s early critics did.
European colonists brought their herbal knowl-
edge and plant specimens to settlements in North
America where they learned from the indigenous
Americans how to make use of numerous nutritive
and medicinal plants, native to the New World.
Many European medicinal plants escaped cultivation
from the early settlements and have become natural-
ized throughout North America. The first record of
Native American herbalism is found in the manuscript
of the native Mexican Indian physician, Juan
Badianus published in 1552. The American Folk tra-
dition of herbalism developed as a blend of traditional
European medicine and Native American herbalism.
The pioneer necessity for self-reliance contributed
to the perseverance of folk medicine well into the
twentieth century.
In Europe in the seventeenth century, the alchemist
Paracelsus changed the direction of western medicine
with the introduction of chemical and mineral medi-
cines. He was the son of a Swiss chemist and physician.
Paracelsus began to apply chemicals, such as arsenic,
mercury, sulfur, iron, and copper sulfate to treat
disease. His chemical approach to the treatment of
disease was a forerunner to the reliance in the twentieth
century on chemical medicine as the orthodox treat-
ment prescribed in mainstream medical practice.
The nineteenth and twentieth centuries brought a
renewed interest in the practice of western herbalism
and the development of natural therapies and health
care systems that ran counter to the mainstream
methods of combating disease symptoms with syn-
thetic pharmaceuticals.
Herbalism, Western
In the late eighteenth century, the German
physician Samuel Hahnemann developed a system of
medicine known as homeopathy. This approach to
healing embraces the philosophy of ‘‘like cures like.’’
Homeopathy uses extremely diluted solutions of
herbs, animal products, and chemicals that are believed
to hold a ‘‘trace memory’’ or energetic imprint of the
substance used. Homeopathic remedies are used to
amplify the patient’s symptoms with remedies that
would act to produce the same symptom in a healthy
person. Homeopathy holds that the symptoms of illness
are evidence of the body’s natural process of healing
and eliminating the cause of the disease.
In 1895, the European medical system known as
Naturopathy was introduced to the North America.
Like homeopathy, this medical approach is based on
the Hippocratic idea of eliminating disease by assisting
the body’s natural healing abilities. The naturopath
uses nontoxic methods to assist the body’s natural
healing processes, including nutritional supplements,
herbal remedies, proper diet, andexercise to restore
health.
Western herbalism is regaining popularity at a
time when the world is assaulted by the stress of
overpopulation and development that threatens the
natural biodiversity necessary for these valuable med-
icinal plants to survive. The American herb market is
growing rapidly and increasing numbers of individuals
are choosing alternative therapies over the main-
stream allopathic western medicine. It is projected
that by the year 2002 consumers will spend more
than seven billion dollars a year on herbal products.
An estimated 2,400 acres of native plant habitat are
lost to development every day. As much as 29% of all
plant life in North America is in danger of extinction,
including some of the most important native medicinal
plants, according to the 1997 World Conservation
Union Red List of Threatened Plants.
Though research into the efficacy and safety of
traditional herbal remedies is increasing, it has been
limited by the high costs of clinical studies and
laboratory research, and by the fact that whole plants
and their constituents are not generally patentable
(therefore, there is no drugprofit after market intro-
duction). Outside the United States, herbalism has
successfully combined with conventional medicine,
and in some countries is fully integrated into the
nations’ health care systems. At the beginning of the
twenty-first century, 80% of the world’s population
continues to rely on herbal treatments. The World
Health Organization, an agency of the United
Nations, promotes traditional herbal medicine for
treatment of many local health problems, particu-
larly in the third world where it is affordable and
already well-integrated into the cultural fabric.
In the United States, the re-emergence in interest
in holistic approaches to health care is evident.
Citizens are demanding access to effective, safe, low-
cost, natural medicine. Legislative and societal change
is needed, however, before natural therapies can be
fully integrated into the orthodox allopathic health
care system and provide citizens with a wide range of
choices for treatment. If the current trend continues,
U. S. citizens will benefit from a choice among a
variety of safe and effective medical treatments.
Herbs are generally defined as any plant or plant
part that may be used for medicinal, nutritional, culin-
ary, or other beneficial purposes. The active constitu-
ents of plants (if known) may be found in varying
amounts in the root, stem, leaf, flower, and fruit, etc.
of the plant. Herbs may be classified into many
different categories. Some western herbalists categorize
herbal remedies according to their strength, action, and
characteristics. Categories may include sedatives, stim-
ulants, laxatives, febrifuges (to reduce fever), and
many others. One system of classification is based
on a principle in traditional Chinese medicine that
categorizes herbs into four classes: tonics, specifics,
heroics, or cleansers and protectors. Within these
broad classifications are the numerous medicinal
actions of the whole herb which may be due to a specific
chemical or combination of chemicals in the plant.
/C15Tonics. Herbs in this classification are also known
as alteratives in western herbalism. They are
A selection of Western herbal medical equipment and tradi-
tional herbs, including foxglove (upper right), ginger (center
right), and periwinkle (lower left). (Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
1792 Herbalism, Western
generally mild in their action and act slowly in the
body, providing gentle stimulation andnutrition to
specific organs and systems. Tonic herbs act over
time to strengthen and nourish the whole body.
These herbs are generally safe and may be used
regularly, even in large quantities. These tonic
herbs are known as ‘‘superior’’ remedies in tradi-
tional Chinese medicine. The therapeutic dose of
tonic remedies is far removed from the possible
toxic dose. American ginseng is an example of a
tonic herb.
/C15Specifics. Herbs in this classification are strong and
specific in their therapeutic action. They are gener-
ally used for short periods of time in smaller dosages
to treat acute conditions. Herbs classified as specifics
are not used beyond the therapeutic treatment
period. Echinacea is a specific herb.
/C15Heroic. These herbs offer high potency but are
potentially toxic, and should not be used in self-
treatment. Because the therapeutic dosage may be
close to the lethal dosage, these herbs are presented
cautiously and closely monitored or avoided
by trained clinicians. They should not be used con-
tinuously or without expert supervision. Poke
(Phytolacca americana) is an example of a heroic
remedy.
/C15Cleansers and protectors. These herbs, plants, and
plant tissues remove wastes and pollutants, while
minimally affecting regular body processes. An exam-
ple of a cleanser is pectin. Pectins are the water soluble
substances that bind cell walls in plant tissues, and
some believe that they help remove heavy metals and
environmental toxins from the body.
Preparations
Herbal preparations are commercially available
in a variety of forms including tablets or capsules,
tinctures, teas, fluid ex tracts, douches, washes,
suppositories, dried herbs, and many other forms.
The medicinal properties of herbs are extracted
from the fresh or dried plant parts by the use of
solvents appropriate to the particular herb. Alcohol,
oil, water, vinegar, glycerin, and propylene glycol
are some of the solvents used to extract and concen-
trate the medicinal propert ies. Steam distillation
and cold-pressing techniques are used to extract the
essential oils. The quality of any herbal remedy and
the potency of the phytochemicals found in the herb
depends greatly on the conditions of weather and
soil where the herb was grown, the timing and care
in harvesting, and the manner of preparation and
storage.
Precautions
Herbal remedies prepared by infusion, decoction,
or alcohol tincture from the appropriate plant part,
such as the leaf, root, or flower are generally safe
when ingested in properly designated therapeutic
dosages. However, many herbs have specific contra-
indications for use when certain medical conditions
are present. Not all herbal remedies may be safely
administered to infants or small children. Many herbs
are not safe for use by pregnant or lactating women.
Some herbs are toxic, even deadly, in large amounts,
and there is little research on the chronic toxicity that
may result from prolonged use. Herbal remedies are
sold in the United States as dietary supplements and
are not regulated for content or efficacy. Self-diagnosis
and treatment with botanical medicinals may be risky.
A consultation with a clinical herbalist, Naturopathic
physician, or certified clinical herbalist is prudent
before undertaking a course of treatment.
Essential oils are highly concentrated and should
not be ingested as a general rule. They should also be
diluted in water or in a non-toxic carrier oil before
application to the skin to preventcontact dermatitisor
photo-sensitization. The toxicity of the concentrated
essential oil varies depending on the chemical constit-
uents of the herb.
The American Professor of Pharmacognosy, Varro
E. Tyler, believes that ‘‘herbal chaos’’ prevails in the
United States with regard to herbs and phytomedic-
inals. In part he blames the herb producers and market-
ers of crude herbs and remedies for what he terms
unproven hyperbolic, poor quality control, deceptive
labeling, resistance to standardization of dosage forms,
and continued sale of herbs determined to be harmful.
Side effects
Herbs have a variety of complex phytochemicals
that act on the body as a whole or on specific organs
KEY TERMS
In vitro— A biological reaction occurring in a
laboratory apparatus.
In vivo— Occurring in a living organism.
Phyto-, as in phytochemical, phytomedicinal, and
phytotherapy— Meaning, or pertaining to, a plant
or plants.
Wildcrafting— Gathering of herbs or other natural
materials.
Herbalism, Western
and systems. Some of these chemical constituents
are mild and safe, even in large doses. Other herbs con-
tain chemicals that act more strongly and may be toxic
in large doses or when taken continuously.Drug inter-
actions are possible with certain herbs when combined
with certain pharmaceutical drugs. Some herbs are tonic
in a small amount and toxic in larger dosages.
Research and general acceptance
Western herbalism is experiencing a revival of
popular and professional interest. The number of
training schools and qualified herbal practitioners is
growing to meet the demand. Western herbalism is
incorporated into the medical practice of licensed
Naturopathic doctors, who receive special training
in clinical herbalism. Folk herbalists, heir to the
continuing oral traditions passed from generation to
generation in many rural areas, as well as amateur,
self-taught herbalists, keep the practice of botanical
medicine alive at the grassroots level. Traditional
western herbalism relies on traditional use and materia
medica, folk wisdom, and recent clinical research and
advances in the extraction processes. These advances
provide increased quality control on the concentration
and potency of the active ingredients. Western physi-
cians, educated in allopathic medicine, typically
receive no training in the use of herbs. These doctors
rely on pharmaceutical drugs for their patients, and
some cite the following reasons for continuing to do
so: lack of standardized dosages, lack of quality
control in the preparation of herbal medicinals, and
the dearth of clinical research verifying the safety and
effectiveness of many traditional herbal remedies.
Herbalism is widely practiced throughout Europe,
particularly in England, France, Italy, and Germany
where phytomedicinals are available in prescription
form and as over-the-counter remedies. In Germany,
plant medicines are regulated by a special government
body known as the Commission E. In the United States,
however, despite increasing popularity, traditional herb-
alism is not integrated into the allopathic medical
system. Phytomedicinals are sold as dietary supplements
rather than being adequately researched and recognized
as safe and effective drugs. The Dietary Supplement
Health and Education Act of 1994 circumvented a U. S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) effort to effec-
tively remove botanicals from the marketplace and
implement regulations restricting sale. Massive popular
outcry against the proposed regulations on the sale of
herbsandphytomedicinalsresultedinthisCongressional
action. In 2000, U.S. President Bill Clinton, by executive
order, created the White House Commission on
Alternative Medicine in an effort to hold alternative
medicine therapies ‘‘to the same standard of scientific
rigor as more traditional health care interventions.’’
That Commissionis chargedwithrecommending federal
guidelines and legislation regarding the use of alternative
medical therapies in the twenty-first century.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Deneen, Sally, with Rembert, Tracey. ‘‘Uprooted, The
Worldwide Plant Crisis Is Accelerating.’’E Magazine
July-August 1999: 36-40.
Liebmann, Richard, N.D. ‘‘United Plant Savers—Planting
the Future.’’PanGaia 22 (Winter 1999-2000): 23- 26.
ORGANIZATIONS
National Center for the Preservation of Medicinal Herbs.
3350 Beech Grove Road, Rutland, Ohio 45775.
(740)742- 4401.
United Plant Savers. P.O. Box 98, East Barre, Vermont
05649. (802) 479-9825. <http://www.plantsavers.org> .
OTHER
Hobbs, Christopher. ‘‘Specific and Tonic Immune Herbs:
Exploring a Practical System of Western Herbalism.’’
Health World. <http://www.healthy.net> .
Oracle Tree New Age Mall. ‘‘Western Medical Astrology:
A Brief History.’’ <http://ww.oracletree.com/
avalonphysics/wesmedas.html> .
Wicke, Roger, Ph.D. ‘‘A World History of Herbology
and Herbalism: Oppressed Arts.’’ Rocky Mountain
Herbal Institute. <http://www.rmhiherbalorg/a/
f.ahrl.hist.html> .
Clare Hanrahan
Herbs see Echinacea; Ginkgo biloba;
Ginseng; Saw palmetto; St. John’s wort
Hereditary cerebral hemorrhage with
amyloidosis see Cerebral amyloid
angiopathy
Hereditary chorea see Huntington’s
disease
Hereditary fructose
intolerance
Definition
Hereditary fructose intolerance is an inherited
condition where the body does not produce the chem-
ical needed to break down fructose (fruit sugar).
1794 Hereditary fructose intolerance
Description
Fructose is a sugar found naturally in fruits, vege-
tables, honey, and table sugar. Fructose intolerance is
a disorder caused by the body’s inability to produce
an enzyme called aldolase B (also called fructose
1-phosphate aldolase) that is necessary for absorption
of fructose. The undigested fructose collects in the
liver and kidneys, eventually causing liver and kidney
failure. One person in about 20,000 is born with this
disorder. It is reported more frequently in the United
States and Northern European countries than in other
parts of the world. It occurs with equal frequency in
males and females.
Causes and symptoms
Fructose intolerance is an inherited disorder
passed on to children through their parents’ genes.
Both the mother and father have the gene that causes
the condition, but may not have symptoms of fructose
intolerance themselves. (This is called an autosomal
recessive pattern of inheritance.) The disorder will not
be apparent until the infant is fed formula, juice, fruits,
or baby foods that contain fructose. Initial symptoms
include vomiting, dehydration, and unexplainedfever.
Other symptoms include extreme thirst and excessive
urination and sweating. There will also be a loss of
appetite and a failure to grow.Tremors and seizures
caused by low blood sugar can occur. The liver
becomes swollen and the patient becomes jaundiced
with yellowing of the eyes and skin. Left untreated,
this condition can lead tocoma and death.
Diagnosis
Urine tests can be used to detect fructose sugar in
the urine. Blood tests can also be used to detecthyper-
bilirubinemia and high levels of liver enzymes in the
blood. A liver biopsy may be performed to test for
levels of enzymes present and to evaluate the extent
of damage to the liver. A fructose-loading test where
a dose of fructose is given to the patient in a well-
controlled hospital or clinical setting may also be
used to confirm fructose intolerance. Both the biopsy
and the loading test can be very risky, particularly in
infants that are already sick.
Treatment
Once diagnosed, fructose intolerance can be
successfully treated by eliminating fructose from the
diet. Patients usually respond within three to four
weeks and can make a complete recovery if fructose-
containing foods are avoided. Early recognition and
treatment of the disease is important to avoid damage
to the liver, kidneys, and small intestine.
Prognosis
If the condition is not recognized and the diet is
not well controlled, death can occur in infants or
young children. With a well-controlled diet, the child
can develop normally.
Prevention
Carriers of the gene for hereditary fructose intol-
erance can be identified through DNA analysis.
Anyone who is known to carry the disease or who
has the disease in his or her family can benefit from
genetic counseling. Since this is a hereditary disorder,
there is currently no known way to prevent it other
than assisting at-risk individuals with family planning
and reproductive decisions.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
National Institutes of Health. National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Building 31,
Room 9A04, 31 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-
2560. (301) 496-3583.
OTHER
‘‘What Is Hereditary Fructose Intolerance?’’ Hereditary
Fructose Intolerance & Aldolase Homepage.
<http://www.bu.edu/aldolase> .
Altha Roberts Edgren
KEY TERMS
Aldolase B— Also called fructose 1-phosphate
aldolase, this chemical is produced in the liver,
kidneys, and brain. It is needed for the breakdown
of fructose, a sugar found in fruits, vegetables,
honey, and other sweeteners.
Hyperbilirubinemia— A condition where there is
a high level of bilirubin in the blood. Bilirubin is a
natural by-product of the breakdown of red blood
cells, however, a high level of bilirubin may indi-
cate a problem with the liver.
Liver biopsy— A surgical procedure where a small
piece of the liver is cut out for examination. A needle
or narrow tube may be inserted either directly
through the skin and muscle or through a small
incision and passed into the liver for collection of
a sample of liver tissue.
Hereditary fructose intolerance
Hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia
Definition
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is an inher-
ited condition characterized by abnormal blood ves-
sels which are delicate and prone to bleeding.
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is also known
as Rendu-Osler-Weber disease.
Description
The term telangiectasia refers to a spot formed,
usually on the skin, by a dilated capillary or terminal
artery. In hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia these
spots occur because the blood vessel is fragile and bleeds
easily. The bleeding may appear as small, red or red-
dish-violet spots on the face, lips, inside the mouth and
nose or the tips of the fingers and toes. Other small
telangiectasias may occur in the digestive tract.
Unlike hemophilia, where bleeding is caused by an
ineffective clotting mechanism in the blood, bleeding
in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is caused by
fragile blood vessels. However, like hemophilia, bleed-
ing may be extensive and can occur without warning.
Causes and symptoms
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, an auto-
somal dominant inherited disorder, occurs in one in
50,000 people.
Recurrent nosebleeds are a nearly universal symp-
tom in this condition. Usually the nosebleeds begin in
childhood and become worse with age. The skin
changes begin atpuberty, and the condition becomes
progressively worse until about 40 years of age, when
it stabilizes.
Diagnosis
The physician will look for red spots on all areas of
the skin, but especially on the upper half of the body,
and in the mouth and nose and under the tongue.
Treatment
There is no specific treatment for hereditary
hemorrhagic telangiectasia. The bleeding resulting
from the condition can be stopped by applying com-
presses or direct pressure to the area. If necessary, a
laser can be used to destroy the vessel. In severe cases,
the leaking artery can be plugged or covered with a
graft from normal tissue.
Prognosis
In most people, recurrent bleeding results in an
iron deficiency. It is usually necessary to take iron
supplements.
Prevention
Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia is an inher-
ited disorder and cannot be prevented.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Medical Association. 515 N. State St., Chicago,
IL 60612. (312) 464-5000. <http://www.ama-assn.org> .
Association of Birth Defect Children. 3526 Emerywood
Lane, Orlando, FL, 32806. (305) 859-2821.
Dorothy Elinor Stonely
Hereditary hyperuricemia see Lesch-Nyhan
syndrome
Hereditary spinocerebellar ataxia see
Friedreich’s ataxia
Hermaphroditism see Intersex states
Hernia
Definition
Hernia is a general term used to describe a bulge
or protrusion of an organ through the structure or
muscle that usually contains it.
Description
There are many different types of hernias. The
most familiar type are those that occur in the abdo-
men, in which part of the intestines protrude through
the abdominal wall. This may occur in different areas
KEY TERMS
Autosomal dominant— A pattern of inheritance in
which the dominant gene on any non-sex chromo-
some carries the defect.
Chromosome— A threadlike structure in the cell
which transmits genetic information.
1796 Hernia
and, depending on the location, the hernia is given a
different name.
An inguinal hernia appears as a bulge in the groin
and may come and go depending on the position of the
person or their level of physical activity. It can occur
with or without pain. In men, the protrusion may
descend into the scrotum. Inguinal hernias account
for 80% of all hernias and are more common in men.
Femoral hernias are similar to inguinal hernias
but appear as a bulge slightly lower. They are more
common in women due to the strain ofpregnancy.
A ventral hernia is also called an incisional hernia
because it generally occurs as a bulge in the abdomen
at the site of an old surgical scar. It is caused by
thinning or stretching of the scar tissue, and occurs
more frequently in people who are obese or pregnant.
An umbilical hernia appears as a soft bulge at the
navel (umbilicus). It is caused by a weakening of the
area or an imperfect closure of the area in infants. This
type of hernia is more common in women due to
pregnancy, and in Chinese and black infants. Some
umbilical hernias in infants disappear without treat-
ment within the first year.
A hiatal or diaphragmatic hernia is different from
abdominal hernias in that it is not visible on the out-
side of the body. With a hiatal hernia, the stomach
bulges upward through the muscle that separates the
chest from the abdomen (the diaphragm). This type of
hernia occurs more often in women than in men, and it
is treated differently from other types of hernias.
Causes and symptoms
Most hernias result from a weakness in the
abdominal wall that either develops or that an infant
is born with (congenital). Any increase in pressure in
the abdomen, such as coughing, straining, heavy
lifting, or pregnancy, can be a considered causative
factor in developing an abdominal hernia.Obesity or
recent excessive weight loss, as well as aging and
previous surgery, are also risk factors.
Most abdominal hernias appear suddenly when
the abdominal muscles are strained. The person may
feel tenderness, a slight burning sensation, or a feeling
of heaviness in the bulge. It may be possible for the
person to push the hernia back into place with gentle
pressure, or the hernia may disappear by itself when
the person reclines. Being able to push the hernia back
is called reducing it. On the other hand, some hernias
cannot be pushed back into place, and are termed
incarcerated or irreducible.
A hiatal hernia may also be caused by obesity,
pregnancy, aging, or previous surgery. About 50% of
all people with hiatal hernias do not have any symptoms.
If symptoms exist they will includeheartburn,u s u a l l y
30–60 minutes following a meal. There may be some mid
chest pain due to gastric acid from the stomach being
pushed up into the esophagus. The pain and heartburn
are usually worse when lying down. Frequent belching
and feelings of abdominal fullness may also be present.
Diagnosis
Generally, abdominal hernias need to be seen and
felt to be diagnosed. Usually the hernia will increase in
size with an increase in abdominal pressure, so the
doctor may ask the person to cough while he or she
feels the area. Once a diagnosis of an abdominal
hernia is made, the doctor will usually send the person
to a surgeon for a consultation. Surgery provides the
only cure for a hernia through the abdominal wall.
With a hiatal hernia, the diagnosis is based on the
symptoms reported by the person. The doctor may
then order tests to confirm the diagnosis. If a barium
swallow is ordered, the person drinks a chalky white
barium solution, which will help any protrusion
through the diaphragm show up on the x ray that
follows. Currently, a diagnosis of hiatal hernia is
more frequently made by endoscopy. This procedure
is done by a gastroenterologist (a specialist in digestive
diseases). During an endoscopy the person is given an
intravenous sedative and a small tube is inserted
through the mouth, then into the esophagus and
stomach where the doctor can visualize the hernia.
The procedure takes about 30 minutes and usually
causes no discomfort. It is done on an outpatient basis.
Treatment
Once an abdominal hernia occurs it tends to
increase in size. Some patients with abdominal hernias
wait and watch for a while prior to choosing surgery.
In these cases, they must avoid strenuous physical
activity such as heavy lifting or straining withconsti-
pation. They may also wear a truss, which is a support
worn like a belt to keep a small hernia from protrud-
ing. People can tell if their hernia is getting worse
if they develop severe constant pain,nausea and vomit-
ing, or if the bulge does not return to normal when
lying down or when they try to gently push it back in
place. In these cases they should consult with their
doctor immediately. But, ultimately, surgery is the
treatment in almost all cases.
There are risks to not repairing a hernia surgically.
Left untreated, a hernia may become incarcerated,
Hernia
which means it can no longer be reduced or pushed
back into place. With an incarcerated hernia the intes-
tines become trapped outside the abdomen. This could
lead to a blockage in the intestine. If it is severe enough
it may cut off the blood supply to the intestine and part
of the intestine might actually die.
When the blood supply is cut off, the hernia is
termed ‘‘strangulated.’’ Because of the risk of tissue
death (necrosis) andgangrene, and because the hernia
can block food from moving through the bowel, a
strangulated hernia is a medical emergency requiring
immediate surgery. Repairing a hernia before it
becomes incarcerated or strangulated is much safer
than waiting until complications develop.
Surgical repair of a hernia is called a herniorrha-
phy. The surgeon will push the bulging part of the
intestine back into place and sew the overlying muscle
back together. When the muscle is not strong enough,
the surgeon may reinforce it with a synthetic mesh.
Surgery can be done on an outpatient basis. It
usually takes 30 minutes in children and 60 minutes
in adults. It can be done under either local orgeneral
anesthesia and is frequently done with a laparoscope.
In this type of surgery, a tube that allows visualization
of the abdominal cavity is inserted through a small
puncture wound. Several small punctures are made to
allow surgical instruments to be inserted. This type of
surgery avoids a larger incision.
A hiatal hernia is treated differently. Medical
treatment is preferred. Treatments include:
/C15avoiding reclining after meals
/C15avoiding spicy foods, acidic foods, alcohol, and
tobacco
/C15eating small, frequent, bland meals
/C15eating a high-fiber diet.
There are also several types of medications that
help to manage the symptoms of a hiatal hernia.
Antacids are used to neutralize gastric acid and
decrease heartburn. Drugs that reduce the amount of
acid produced in the stomach (H2 blockers) are also
used. This class of drugs includes famotidine (sold
under the name Pepcid), cimetidine (Tagamet), and
ranitidine (Zantac). Omeprazole (Prilosec) is not an
H2 blocker, but is another drug that suppresses gastric
acid secretion and is used for hiatal hernias. Another
option may be metoclopramide (Reglan), a drug that
increases the tone of the muscle around the esophagus
and causes the stomach to empty more quickly.
Alternative treatment
There are alternative therapies for hiatal hernia.
Visceral manipulation, done by a trained therapist,
can help replace the stomach to its proper positioning.
Other options in addition to H2 blockers are available
to help regulate stomach acid production and balance.
One of them, deglycyrrhizinated licorice (DGL), helps
balance stomach acid by improving the protective
substances that line the stomach and intestines and by
improving blood supply to these tissues. DGL does
not interrupt the normal function of stomach acid.
As with traditional therapy, dietary modifications
are important. Small, frequent meals will keep pres-
sure down on the esophageal sphincter. Also, raising
the head of the bed several inches with blocks or books
can help with both the quality and quantity of sleep.
Prognosis
Abdominal hernias generally do not recur in
children but can recur in up to 10% of adult patients.
Surgery is considered the only cure, and the prognosis
is excellent if the hernia is corrected before it becomes
strangulated.
Hiatal hernias are treated successfully with
medication and diet modifications 85% of the time.
An illustration of an epigastric (abdominal) hernia in an adult
male. The torso is shown with its skin removed. Epigastric
hernia is caused commonly by a congenital weakness in
muscles of the central upper abdomen; the intestine bulges
out through the muscle at a point between the navel and
breastbone. (Photograph by John Bavosi, Photo Researchers,
Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
1798 Hernia
The prognosis remains excellent even if surgery is
required in adults who are in otherwise good health.
Prevention
Some hernias can be prevented by maintaining a
reasonable weight, avoiding heavy lifting and consti-
pation, and following a moderateexercise program to
maintain good abdominal muscle tone.
Resources
BOOKS
Bare, Brenda G., and Suzanne C. Smeltzer.Brunner and
Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical-Surgical Nursing.
8th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1996.
Joyce S. Siok, RN
Hernia repair
Definition
Hernia repair is a surgical procedure to return an
organ that protrudes through a weak area of muscle to
its original position.
Purpose
Hernias occur when a weakness in the wall of the
abdomen allows an organ, usually the intestines, to
bulge out of place. Hernias may result from a genetic
predisposition toward this weakness. They can also be
the result of weakening the muscle through improper
exercise or poor lifting techniques. Both children
and adults get hernias. Some are painful, while others
are not.
There are three levels of hernias. An uncompli-
cated hernia is one where the intestines bulge into the
peritoneum (the membrane lining the abdomen), but
they can still be manipulated back into the body
(although they don’t stay in place without corrective
surgery). This is termed a reducible hernia.
If the intestines bulge through the hernia defect
and become trapped, this is called an incarcerated
hernia. If the blood supply to an incarcerated hernia
is shut off, the hernia is called a strangulated hernia.
Strangulated hernias can result ingangrene.
Both incarcerated and strangulated hernias are
medical emergencies and require emergency surgery
to correct. For this reason, doctors generally recom-
mend the repair of an uncomplicated hernia, even if it
causes no discomfort to the patient.
Precautions
Hernia repair can be performed under local,
regional, or general anesthesia. The choice depends
on the age and health of the patient and the type of
hernia. Generally hernia repair is very safe surgery,
but—as with any surgery—the risk of complications
increases if the patient smokes, is obese, is very
young or very old, uses alcohol heavily, or uses illicit
drugs.
Description
Hernia repairs are performed in a hospital or
outpatient surgical facility by a general surgeon.
Depending on the patient’s age, health, and the type
of hernia, patients may be able to go home the same
day or may remain hospitalized for up to three to
five days.
There are two types of hernia repair. A hernior-
rhaphy is used for simpler hernias. The intestines are
returned to their proper place and the defect in the
abdominal wall is mended. A hernioplasty is used for
larger hernias. In this procedure, plastic or steel mesh
is added to the abdominal wall to repair and reinforce
the weak spot.
There are five kinds of common hernia repairs.
They are named for the part of the body closest to the
hernia, or bulge.
KEY TERMS
Endoscopy— A diagnostic procedure in which a
tube is inserted through the mouth, into the esopha-
gus and stomach. It is used to visualize various
digestive disorders, including hiatal hernias.
Herniorrhaphy— Surgical repair of a hernia.
Incarcerated hernia— A hernia that can not be
reduced, or pushed back into place inside the
intestinal wall.
Reducible hernia— A hernia that can be gently
pushed back into place or that disappears when
the person lies down.
Strangulated hernia— A hernia that is so tightly
incarcerated outside the abdominal wall that the
intestine is blocked and the blood supply to that
part of the intestine is cut off.
Hernia repair
Femoral hernia repair
This procedure repairs a hernia that occurs in the
groin where the thigh meets the abdomen. It is called a
femoral hernia repair because it is near the spot where
the femoral artery and vein pass from the leg into the
trunk of the body. Sometimes this type of hernia
creates a noticeable bulge.
An incision is made in the groin area. The tissues
are separated from the hernia sac, and the intestines
are returned to the abdomen. The area is often rein-
forced with webbing before it is sewn shut. The skin is
closed with sutures or metal clips that can be removed
in about one week.
Inguinal hernia repair
Inguinal hernia repair closes a weakness in the
abdominal wall that is near the inguinal canal, the spot
where the testes descend from the body into the scrotum.
This type of hernia occurs in about two percent of adult
males.
An incision is made in the abdomen, then the her-
nia is located and repaired. The surgeon must be alert
not to injure the spermatic cord, the testes, or the blood
supply to the testes. If the hernia is small, it is simply
repaired. If it is large, the area is reinforced with mesh to
prevent a recurrence. External skin sutures can be
removed in about a week. Patients should not resume
sexual activity until being cleared by their doctor.
Umbilical hernia repair
This procedure repairs a hernia that occurs when
the intestines bulge through the abdomen wall near
the navel. Umbilical hernias are most common in
infants.
An incision is made near the navel. The hernia
is located and the intestines are returned to the
abdomen. The peritoneum is closed, then the large
abdominal muscle is pulled over the weak spot in
such a way as to reinforce the area. External sutures
or skin clips can be removed in about 10 days.
Incisional hernia repair
Incisional hernias occur most frequently at the site
of a scar from earlier abdominal surgery. Once again,
the abdomen is opened and the intestines returned to
their proper place. The area is reinforced with mesh,
and the abdominal wall is reconstructed to prevent
another hernia from developing. External sutures can
be removed in about a week.
Hiatal hernia
A hiatal hernia repair is slightly different from the
other hernias described here, because it corrects a
weakness or opening in the diaphragm, the muscle
that separates the chest cavity from the abdominal
cavity. This surgery is done to prevent the stomach
from shifting up into the chest cavity and to prevent
the stomach from spilling gastric juices into the
esophagus, causingpain and scarring.
An incision is made in the abdomen or chest, and
the hole or weakness in the diaphragm is located and
repaired. The top of the stomach is wrapped around
the bottom of the esophagus, and they are sutured
together to hold the stomach in place. Sometimes the
Penis
Hernia
Sutures
Testicle
Intestinal hernia
In this inguinal hernia repair, an incision is made in the abdomen. The hernia is located, and the intestines are returned to the
abdomen. The abdominal wall is then sutured together to close any space and reinforce the weak area.(Illustration by Electronic
Illustrators Group.)
1800 Hernia repair
vagus nerve is cut in order to decrease the amount of
acid the stomach produces. External sutures can be
removed in about one week. This type of hernia repair
often requires a longer hospital stay than the other
types, although techniques are being improved that
reduce invasiveness of the surgery and the length of
the hospital stay.
Preparation
Before the operation, the patient will have blood
and urine collected for testing. X rays are taken of
the affected area. In a hiatal hernia, an endoscopy
(a visual inspection of the organs) is done.
Patients should meet with the anesthesiologist
before the operation to discuss any medications or
conditions that might affect the administration of
anesthesia. Patients may be asked to temporarily
discontinue certain medications. The day of the opera-
tion, patients should not eat or drink anything. They
may be given an enema to clear the bowels.
Aftercare
Patients should eat a clear liquid diet until the
gastrointestinal tract begins functioning again.
Normally this is a short period of time. After that,
they are free to eat a healthy, well-balanced diet of
their choice. They may bathe normally, using a gentle,
unscented soap. An antibiotic ointment may be
prescribed for the incision. After the operation, a
hard ridge will form along the incision line. With
time, this ridge softens and becomes less noticeable.
Patients who remain in the hospital will have blood
drawn for follow-up studies.
Patients should begin easy activities, such as walk-
ing, as soon as they are comfortable, but should avoid
strenuous exercise for four to six weeks, and especially
avoid heavy lifting. Learning and practicing proper
lifting techniques is an important part of patient edu-
cation after the operation. Patients may be given a
laxative or stool softener so that they will not strain
to have bowel movements. They should discuss with
their doctor when to resume driving and sexual
activity.
Risks
As with any surgery, there exists the possibility of
excessive bleeding and infection after the surgery. In
inguinal and femoral hernia repair, a slight risk of
damage to the testicles or their blood supply exists
for male patients. Accidental damage may be caused
to the intestinal tract, but generally complications
are few.
Normal results
The outcome of surgery depends on the age and
health of the patient and on the type of hernia.
Although most hernias can be repaired without
complications, hernias recur in 10–20% of people
who have had hernia surgery.
Resources
OTHER
‘‘Hernia Repair.’’ThriveOnline.
<http://thriveonline.oxygen.com> .
Tish Davidson, A.M.
Herniated disk
Definition
Disk herniation is a rupture of fibrocartilagenous
material (annulus fibrosis) that surrounds the inter-
vertebral disk. This rupture involves the release of the
disk’s center portion containing a gelatinous sub-
stance called the nucleus pulposus. Pressure from the
vertebrae above and below may cause the nucleus
pulposus to be forced outward, placing pressure on a
spinal nerve and causing considerable pain and
damage to the nerve. This condition most frequently
occurs in the lumbar region and is also commonly
called herniated nucleus pulposus, prolapsed disk,
ruptured intervertebral disk, or slipped disk.
KEY TERMS
Endoscopy— A procedure in which an instrument
containing a camera is inserted into the gastroin-
testinal tract so that the doctor can visually inspect
the gastrointestinal system.
Gangrene— Death and decay of body tissue
because the blood supply is cut off. Tissues that
have died in this way must be surgically removed.
Peritoneum— The transparent membrane lining the
abdominal cavity that holds organs such as the
intestines in place.
Herniated disk
Description
The spinal column is made up of 26 vertebrae that
are joined together and permit forward and backward
bending, side bending, and rotation of the spine. Five
distinct regions comprise the spinal column, including
the cervical (neck) region, thoracic (chest) region,
lumbar (low back) region, sacral and coccygeal (tail-
bone) region. The cervical region consists of seven
vertebrae, the thoracic region includes 12 vertebrae,
and the lumbar region contains five vertebrae. The
sacrum is composed of five fused vertebrae, which
are connected to four fused vertebrae forming the
coccyx. Intervertebral disks lie between each adjacent
vertebra.
Each disk is composed of a gelatinous material in
the center, called the nucleus pulposus, surrounded
by rings of a fiberous tissue (annulus fibrosus). In
disk herniation, an intervertebral disk’s central
portion herniates or slips through the surrounding
annulus fibrosus into the spinal canal, putting pres-
sure on a nerve root. Disk herniation most commonly
affects the lumbar regionbetween the fifth lumbar
vertebra and the first sacral vertebra. However, disk
herniation can also occur in the cervical spine. The
incidence of cervical disk herniation is most common
between the fifth and sixth cervical vertebrae. The
second most common area for cervical disk hernia-
tion occurs between the sixth and seventh cervical
vertebrae. Disk herniation is less common in the
thoracic region.
Predisposing factors associated with disk hernia-
tion include age, gender, and work environment. The
peak age for occurrence of disk herniation is between
20–45 years of age. Studies have shown that males are
more commonly affected than females in lumbar disk
herniation by a 3:2 ratio. Prolonged exposure to a
bent-forward work posture is correlated with an
increased incidence of disk herniation.
There are four classifications of disk pathology:
/C15A protrusion may occur where a disk bulges without
rupturing the annulus fibrosis.
/C15The disk may prolapse where the nucleus pulposus
migrates to the outermost fibers of the annulus
fibrosis.
/C15There may be a disk extrusion, which is the case if the
annulus fibrosis perforates and material of the
nucleus moves into the epidural space.
/C15The sequestrated disk may occur as fragments from
the annulus fibrosis and nucleus pulposus are outside
the disk proper.
Causes and symptoms
Any direct, forceful, and vertical pressure on the
lumbar disks can cause the disk to push its fluid con-
tents into the vertebral body. Herniated nucleus pul-
posus may occur suddenly from lifting, twisting, or
direct injury, or it can occur gradually from degenera-
tive changes with episodes of intensifying symptoms.
The annulus may also become weakened over time,
allowing stretching or tearing and leading to a disk
herniation. Depending on the location of the hernia-
tion, the herniated material can also press directly on
nerve roots or on the spinal cord, causing a shock-like
pain (sciatica) down the legs, weakness,numbness,o r
problems with bowels, bladder, or sexual function.
Diagnosis
Several radiographic tests are useful for confirming
a diagnosis of disk herniation and locating the source
of pain. These tests also help the surgeon indicate the
extent of the surgery needed to fully decompress the
nerve. X rays show structural changes of the lumbar
spine. Myelography is a special x ray of the spine in
which a dye or air is injected into the patient’s spinal
canal. The patient lies strapped to a table as the table
tilts in various directions and spot x rays are taken.
X rays showing a narrowed dye column in the inter-
vertebral disk area indicate possible disk herniation.
Computed tomography scan (CT or CAT scans)
exhibit the details of pathology necessary to obtain
consistently good surgical results. Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) analysis of the disks can accurately
detect the early stages of disk aging and degeneration.
Electomyograms (EMGs) measure the electrical activ-
ity of the muscle contractions and possibly show
evidence of nerve damage. An EMG is a powerful
tool for assessing muscle fatigue associated with
muscle impairment withlow back pain.
Treatment
Drugs
Unless serious neurologic symptoms occur, her-
niated disks can initially be treated with pain medica-
tion and up to 48 hours of bed rest. There is no proven
benefit from resting more than 48 hours. Patients are
then encouraged to gradually increase their activity.
Pain medications, including antiinflammatories,
muscle relaxers, or in severe cases,narcotics, may be
continued if needed.
Epidural steroid injections have been used to
decrease pain by injecting an antiinflammatory drug,
1802 Herniated disk
usually a corticosteroid, around the nerve root to
reduce inflammation and edema (swelling). This
partly relieves the pressure on the nerve root as well
as resolves the inflammation.
Physical therapy
Physical therapists are skilled in treating acute
back pain caused by the disk herniation. The physical
therapist can provide noninvasive therapies, such as
ultrasound or diathermy to project heat deep into the
tissues of the back or administer manual therapy, if
mobility of the spine is impaired. They may help
improve posture and develop an exercise program
for recovery and long-term protection. Appropriate
exercise can help take pressure off inflamed nerve
structures, while improving overall posture and flex-
ibility. Traction can be used to try to decrease pressure
on the disk. A lumbar support can be helpful for a
herniated disk at this level as a temporary measure to
reduce pain and improve posture.
Surgery
Surgery is often appropriate for conditions that do
not improve with the usual treatment. In this event, a
strong, flexible spine is important for a quick recovery
after surgery. There are several surgical approaches to
treating a herniated disk, including the classic disc-
ectomy, microdiscectomy, or percutanteous discectomy.
The basic differences among these procedures are the
size of the incision, how the disk is reached surgically,
and how much of the disk is removed.
Discectomy is the surgical removal of the portion
of the disk that is putting pressure on a nerve causing
the back pain. In the classic disectomy, the surgeon
first enters through the skin and then removes a bony
portion of the vertebra called the lamina, hence the
term laminectomy. The surgeon removes the disk
material that is pressing on a nerve. Rarely is the entire
lamina or disk entirely removed. Often, only one
side is removed and the surgical procedure is termed
hemi-laminectomy.
Spinal cord
Vertebra
Disk
Spinal nerve
A herniated disk refers to the rupture of fibrocartilagenous material, called the annulus fibrosis, that surrounds the interverteb-
ral disk. When this occurs, pressure from the vertebrae above and below may force the disk’s center portion, a gel-like
substance, outward, placing additional pressure on the spinal nerve and causing pain and damage to the nerve.(Illustration by
Electronic Illustrators Group.)
Herniated disk