DISEASE: Malaria
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Coccaro, E. F., C. A. Schmidt, J. F. Samuels, and
G. Nestadt. ‘‘Lifetime and 1-Month Prevalence Rates
of Intermittent Explosive Disorder in a Community
Sample.’’ Journal of Clinical Psychiatry65 (June 2004):
820–824.
Grant, J. E., and M. N. Potenza. ‘‘Impulse Control
Disorders: Clinical Characteristics and
Pharmacological Management.’’Annals of
Clinical Psychiatry16 (January–March 2004):
27–34.
Kant, R., R. Chalansani, K. N. Chengappa, and M. F.
Dieringer. ‘‘The Off-Label Use of Clozapine in
Adolescents with Bipolar Disorder, Intermittent
Explosive Disorder, or Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.’’
Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology
14 (Spring 2004): 57–63.
McElroy, Susan L. ‘‘Recognition and Treatment of DSM-
IV Intermittent Explosive Disorder.’’Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry (1999): 12–16.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry.
3615 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, Washington, DC
20016-3007. (202) 966-7300. Fax: (202) 966-2891.
<http://www.aacap.org> .
American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street, NW,
Washington, DC 20005. <http://www.psych.org> .
National Institute of Mental Health. 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Room 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD
20892-9663. (301) 443-4513. <http://www.nimh.nih.gov> .
OTHER
Padgitt, Steven T. ‘‘Treating Intermittent Explosive
Disorder with Neurofeedback’’ Behavenet.com. May 7,
2001. <http://www.behavenet.com/capsules/disor-
ders/explosivedis.htm> .
Janie F. Franz
Rebecca Frey, PhD
Internal fetal monitoring see Electronic fetal
monitoring
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia see
Ophthalmoplegia
Interpositional reconstruction see
Arthroplasty
Intersex states
Definition
Intersex states are conditions where a newborn’s
sex organs (genitals) look unusual, making it impossi-
ble to identify the sex of the baby from its outward
appearance.
Description
All developing babies start out with external
sex organs that look female. If the baby is male, the
internal sex organs mature and begin to produce the
male hormone testosterone. If the hormones reach
the tissues correctly, the external genitals that looked
female change into the scrotum and penis. Sometimes,
the genetic sex (as indicated by chromosomes) may not
match the appearance of the external sex organs.
About 1 in every 2,000 births results in a baby whose
sex organs look unusual.
Patients with intersexstates can be classifiedasa true
hermaphrodite, a female pseudohermaphrodite, or a
male pseudohermaphrodite.Thisisdetermined byexam-
ining the internal and external structures of the child.
A true hermaphrodite is born with both ovaries and
testicles. They also have mixed male and female external
genitals. This condition is extremely rare.
A female pseudohermaphrodite is a genetic
female. However, the external sex organs have been
masculinized and look like a penis. This may occur if
the mother takes the hormone progesterone to prevent
KEY TERMS
Cognitive therapy— A form of short-term psy-
chotherapy that focuses on changing people’s pat-
terns of emotional reaction by correcting distorted
patterns of thinking and perception.
Delirium— An acute but temporary disturbance of
consciousness marked by confusion, difficulty pay-
ing attention, delusions, hallucinations, or restless-
ness. Delirium may be caused by drug intoxication,
high fever related to infection, head trauma, brain
tumors, kidney or liver failure, or various metabolic
disturbances.
Kleptomania— A mental disorder characterized by
impulsive stealing.
Neurotransmitter— Any of a group of chemicals
that transmit nerve impulses across the gap
(synapse) between two nerve cells.
Pyromania— A mental disorder characterized by
setting fires.
Serotonin— A neurotransmitter or brain chemical
that is responsible for transporting nerve impulses.
2046 Intersex states
a miscarriage, but more often it is caused by an over-
production of certain hormones.
A male pseudohermaphrodite is a genetic male.
However, the external sex organs fail to develop nor-
mally. Intersex males may have testes and a female-
like vulva, or a very small penis.
Causes and symptoms
Any abnormality in chromosomes or sex hor-
mones, or in the unborn baby’s response to the
hormones, can lead to an intersex state in a newborn.
Intersex states may also be caused by a condition
called congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which occurs in
about 1 out of every 5,000 newborns. This disease
blocks the baby’s metabolism and can cause a range
of symptoms, including abnormal genitals.
Diagnosis
When doctors are uncertain about a newborn’s sex,
a specialist in infant hormonal problems is consulted as
soon as possible. Ultrasound can locate a uterus behind
the bladder and can determine if there is a cervix or
uterine canal. Blood tests can check the levels of sex
hormones in the baby’s blood, and chromosome ana-
lysis (called karyotyping) can determine sex.
Explorative surgery or a biopsy of reproductive tissue
may be necessary. Only after thorough testing can a
correct diagnosis and determination of sex be made.
Treatment
Treatment of intersex states is controversial.
Traditional treatment assigns sex according to test
results, the potential for the child to identify with a
sex, and the ease of genital surgery to make the organs
look more normal. Treatment may then includerecon-
structive surgeryfollowed by hormone therapy. Babies
born with congenital adrenal hyperplasia can be
treated with cortisone-type drugs and sometimes
surgery.
Counseling should be given to the entire family of
an intersex newborn. Families should explore all avail-
able medical and surgical options. Counseling should
also be provided to the child when he or she is old
enough.
Prognosis
Since the mid-1950s, doctors have typically
assigned a sex to an intersex infant based on how
easy reconstructive surgery would be. The American
Academy of Pediatrics states that children with these
types of genitals can be raised successfully as members
of either sex, and recommends surgery within the first
15 months of life.
Some people are critic al of this approach,
including intersex adults who were operated on as
children. The remolded genitals do not function
sexually and can be the source of lifelong pain.
They suggest that surgery be delayed until the
patient can make informed choices about surgery
and intervention.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
Ambiguous Genitalia Support Network. P.O. Box 313,
Clements, CA 95227. (209) 727-0313.
Intersex Society. P.O. Box 31791, San Francisco, CA 94131.
Carol A. Turkington
This infant was born with female and male genitalia.
(Photography by Mike Peres, Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Chromosomes— Spaghetti-like structures located
within the nucleus (or central portion) of each
cell. Chromosomes contain the genetic information
necessary to direct the development and function-
ing of all cells and systems in the body. They pass
on hereditary traits from parents to child (like eye
color) and determine whether the child will be
male or female.
Intersex states
Interstitial microwave thermal
therapy
Definition
Interstitial microwave thermal therapy is a type of
hyperthermia treatment for cancer, in which heat
produced by microwaves (which are a non-ionizing
form of radiation) is used in conjunction with other
cancer treatments, such as radiation orchemotherapy,
to kill cancer cells associated with tumors located deep
with the body.
Purpose
The purpose of interstitial microwave thermal
therapy is to damage and kill cancer cells associated
with tumors that are deep within the body. Interstitial
microwave therapy is a type of hyperthermia cancer
treatment procedure (also called thermal therapy or
thermotherapy) in which body tissue and the cancer-
ous tumor are exposed to high temperatures (up to
1138F). Hyperthermia kills cancer cells with usually
only minimal injury to normal tissues by damaging
proteins and structures within the cells. Thermal
therapy is usually used with other forms of cancer
therapy, such as radiation and chemotherapy. The
increased temperatures may make some cancer cells
more sensitive to radiation or may harm some cancer
cells that radiation cannot damage.
Precautions
If a patient has become insensitive topain due to
disease, radiation, surgery, anesthetics, or other condi-
tions, hyperthermia treatment cannot be used to treat
tumors. Also the excessive heating of normal surround-
ing tissue is prevented by normal blood perfusion,
so hyperthermia should not be used in patients with
known circulatory problems in the heated areas or in
patients who are taking vasoconstrictive drugs.
Description
Interstitial microwave thermal therapy is used to
treat tumors that are deep within the body, such as
brain, cervical, breast, prostate, and neck tumors.
This technique allows the tumor to be heated to higher
temperatures than external thermal therapy techniques
allow. Probes or needles are inserted into the tumor,
guided by the use of imaging techniques, such as ultra-
sound, to make sure that the probe is properly located
within the tumor. A new type of microwave generator
includes electronic phase control that allows the
operator to electronically direct and shape the pattern
of hyperthermia treatments based on the positioning
the microwave antennae array that is used in treating
the tumor. The treatment pattern can be electronically
targeted on the tumor position, shape, and size.
Tissues are heated as the electromagnetic energy
produced by the microwave treatment results in heat-
ing through molecular excitation. This energy is dis-
sipated in normal living tissue by the blood that
perfuses through the tissue. However, since large
solid malignant tumors have less blood perfusion
than the surrounding normal tissue, for a given
absorbed thermal dose, the tumor reaches a higher
temperature than the normal tissue. Tumors present
within normal tissue will therefore be preferentially
heated and will reach higher temperatures than the
surrounding tissue.
As cancerous tumors grow rapidly, their need for
blood quickly begins to exceed the available blood
supply, and major portions of the tumors become
blood-starved. These blood-starved tumors are
resistant to both radiation and chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy drugs carried through the blood
cannot effectively penetrate tumors that have poor
blood flow. Poor blood flow also means that the
tumors are oxygen-starved (hypoxic), making it diffi-
cult forradiation therapyto make the oxygen radicals
that are needed to destroy the DNA of cancer cells.
Hypoxic cancer cells, which are an especially danger-
ous type of cancer, for they have a tendency to
metastasize and spread the cancer to other parts of
the body, are three times more resistant to ionizing
radiation than are normal cells.
When the tumor is heated tofever levels through
the use of microwave thermal therapy, its blood vessels
expand so that more blood can flow into the tumor in
order to carry away the excess heat. With the increased
blood flow, more blood-borne chemotherapy drugs
can be carried into the tumor. Blood is also the source
of oxygen for tumors, so with increased blood flow
due to the thermal therapy, radiation therapy can
form the necessary oxygen radicals to kill the cancer
cells. The increased temperature also acts as a drug
activator, accelerating chemical reactions and pulling
increased oxygen molecules into the tumor tissue
for chemical reactions with the chemotherapy drug.
Hypothermia also enhances the effectiveness of che-
motherapy drugs encapsulated in liposomes, increas-
ing the penetration of the drug into the tumor.
When tumors are heated to higher temperatures
for at least an hour, the tumors in some cases have
been shown to decrease in size and to exhibit necrosis
2048 Interstitial microwave thermal therapy
(death of the tumor cells). Therefore, hyperthermia by
itself also tends to shrink tumors, often dramatically,
due to the collapse of dead cancer cells, making it
easier to remove the tumor by surgical techniques.
For tumors of the head and neck, a smaller tumor
due to hyperthermia treatment may reduce the disfig-
uration associated with surgical removal of the tumor.
Hyperthermia is being studied as a means of
enhancing gene therapy by acting as an activator to
turn on new biological therapies, by speeding up gene
production by thousands of times. In addition,
hyperthermia is used as an essential tool to turn on
anti-tumor vaccines that are based on heat shock pro-
teins. Hyperthermia has been shown to prevent a can-
cererous tumor from growing new blood vessels to
expand its blood supply. With regards to quality of
life, hyperthermia lessens pain and stimulates the
immune system, thus helping patients recover from
toxic cancer therapies such as ionizing radiation and
chemotherapy. Even in patients with terminal cancer,
hyperthermia can provide benefits through the allevia-
tion of bleeding, pain, and infection.
As of 2005, the use of hyperthermia alone and in
conjunction with radiation therapy has been approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration
for the treatment of advanced, recurrent, and persis-
tent tumors, upon authorization of a licensed practi-
tioner. When used with radiation, the treatment
regimen usually consists of 10 hyperthermia treat-
ments delivered twice a week, at 72 hour intervals.
The prescribed radiation is administered within
30 minutes of the hyperthermia treatment. During
each heat treatment, the temperature within the tumor
is usually maintained at 42.5 degrees centigrade for
60 minutes. The use of hyperthermia in conjunction
with chemotherapy is presently investigational in the
United States as of 2005.
The effectiveness of treatment is related to the
temperature achieved during the treatment process,
the length of the treatment, and cell and tissue char-
acteristics. The temperature within the tumor must be
monitored to ensure that the appropriate temperature
is achieved, but not exceeded, in the treatment area.
Monitoring is accomplished by inserting small needles
or tubes with small thermometers into the treatment
area. Imaging techniques such as computed tomogra-
phy (CT) are used to make sure that the temperature
probes are positioned appropriately.
Preparation
The safety and effectiveness of hyperthermia
treatment is dependent on careful placement of the
temperature probes and careful monitoring of tissue
temperatures during treatment.
Aftercare
During the treatment period, which may last for
weeks, the patient must be instructed in proper care of
implanted catheters and temperature probe sites to
avoid the risk of infection.
Risks
Excessive heating of normal tissues may result in
areas of thermal aseptic necrosis that will require
medical care. The electromagnetic radiation from the
microwave equipment can interfere with electronic
devices such as cardiacpacemakers or other implanted
electronic devices. Thermal treatment of tumors in the
neck or head may result in inadvertent heating of
thermoregulatory centers in the brain stem, thus
resulting in overheating of the body, beyond levels
that the patient can tolerate. Metallic implants, such
as joint protheses or dental braces may become exces-
sively and preferentially overheated and adversely
affect the patient.
Normal results
The effectiveness of interstitial microwave ther-
mal therapy varies among cancer patients. For exam-
ple, studies have shown in Phase III clinical trials,
when hyperthermia was used with ionizing radiation
treatment, that the following treatment improvements
were seen, as compared to the use of ionizing radiation
therapy alone:
/C15complete response for recurrent breast cancer
increased from 38% to 60%
/C152-year survival for globlastoma (brain cancer)
increased from 15% to 31%
/C15complete response for advanced cervical cancer
increased from 57% to 83%
Known side effects of hypothermia are associated
with direct effects of heat on tissues and indirect effects
of tumor necrosis. These side effects, as determined in
various medical studies, include:
/C15surface burns and blistering in the area of application
of heat by the microwave applicators; experienced in
about 10% of the tumor sites studied.
/C15localized and temporary pain in the area of and
during the delivery of the heat by the microwave
applicators; experienced in about 8% of the tumor
sites studied.
Interstitial microwave thermal therapy
/C15ulceration from rapid tumor necrosis following
successful hyperthermia treatment, resulting in
fever from toxemia and patient discomfort through
drainage and bleeding; experienced in about 4% of
the tumor sites studied.
/C15local and systematic (rarely) infections from place-
ment of the temperature probes and from ulceration
related to tumor necrosis; experienced in about 2%
of the tumor sites studied.
Abnormal results
Hyperthermia has the potential for producing the
following adverse reactions as a result of exposure to
electromagnetic radiation:
/C15cataracts
/C15permanent or temporary male sterility
/C15exacerbation of existing diseases due to additional
systemic stress
/C15enhanced drug activity
/C15thermal stress
Resources
BOOKS
Rosenbaum, Ernest, Dollinger, Malin, Tempero, Margaret,
and Mulvihill, Sean.Everyone’s Guide to Cancer
Therapy. 4th Edition.Kansas City, KS: Andrews
McMeel Publishing, 2002
PERIODICALS
Falk, M.H., and Issels, R.D. ‘‘Hyperthermia in Oncology.’’
International Journal of Hyperthermia.2001, (17) 1–18.
van der Zee, J. ‘‘Heating the Patient: A Promising
Approach?’’ Annals of Oncology2002, (13) 1173–1184.
Wust, P., Hildebrandt, B., Sreenivasa, G. et al.
‘‘Hyperthermia in Combined Treatment of Cancer.’’
The Lancet Oncology2002, (3) 487–497.
ORGANIZATION
Hyperthermia in Cancer Treatment. National Cancer
Institute. <www.cis.nci.gov/fact/7_3.htm>
Society for Thermal Medicine. <www.thermaltherapy.org> .
Judith L. Sims
Intestinal culture see Stool culture
Intestinal lymphangiectasia see
Malabsorption syndrome
Intestinal obstructions
Definition
Intestinal obstruction refers to the partial or
complete mechanical or nonmechanical blockage of
the small or large intestine.
Description
There are two types of intestinal obstructions,
mechanical and nonmechanical. Mechanical obstruc-
tions occur because the bowel is physically blocked
and its contents cannot get past the obstruction.
Mechanical obstructions can occur for several rea-
sons. Sometimes the bowel twists on itself (volvulus)
or telescopes into itself (intussusception). Mechanical
obstruction can also result from hernias, impacted
feces, abnormal tissue growth, the presence of for-
eign bodies in the intestines (including gallstones ),
or inflammatory bowel disease ( Crohn’s disease ).
Nonmechanical obstruction, called ileus, occurs
because the wavelike muscular contractions of the
intestine (peristalsis) that ordinarily move food
through the digestive tract stop.
Mechanical obstruction in infants
Infants under one year of age are most likely to
have intestinal obstruction caused by meconium ileus,
volvulus, and intussusception. Meconium ileus, which
is the inability to pass the first fecal excretion after
birth (meconium), is a disorder of newborns. It is an
early clue that the infant hascystic fibrosis, but may
also occur in very low birth weight (VLBW) infants.
In meconium ileus, the material that is blocking the
KEY TERMS
Blood perfusion— A physiological term that refers
to the process of nutritive delivery of arterial blood
to a capillary bed in the biological tissue.
Hyperthermia therapy— A type of treatment in
which body tissue is exposed to high temperatures
to damage and kill cancer cells or to make cancer
cells more sensitive to the effects of radiation and
certain anticancer drugs.
Non-ionizing radiation— Rays of energy that move
in long, slow wave patterns and do not penetrate
cells.t
Ionizing radiation— Any electromagnetic or parti-
culate radiation capable of producing ions, directly
or indirectly, in its passage through matter.
2050 Intestinal obstructions
intestine is thick and stringy, rather than the collection
of mucus and bile that is passed by normal infants. The
abnormal meconium must be removed with an enema
or through surgery.
Volvulus is the medical term for twisting of either
the small or large bowel. The twisting may cut off the
blood supply to the bowel, leading to tissuedeath
(gangrene). This development is called a strangulating
obstruction.
In intussusception, the bowel telescopes into itself
like a radio antenna folding up. Intussusception is
most common in children between the ages of three
and nine months, although it also occurs in older
children. Almost twice as many boys suffer intussus-
ception as girls. It is, however, difficult for doctors to
predict which infants will suffer from intestinal
obstruction.
Mechanical obstruction in adults
Obstructions in adults are usually caused by
tumors, trauma, volvulus, the presence of foreign
bodies such as gallstones, or hernias, although they
have also been reported in adults with cystic fibrosis.
Volvulus occurs most often in elderly adults and
psychiatrically disturbed patients. Intussusception in
adults is usually associated with tumors in the bowel,
whether benign or malignant.
More recently, gastroenterologists have described
a postsurgical complication known as early postopera-
tive small bowel obstruction, or EPSBO. Although this
condition was at one time confused with postoperative
ileus, it is now known to be caused by mechanical
obstructions resulting fromradiation therapyfor cancer
or laparoscopic surgery. Most casses can be succesfully
treated within 10–14 days of surgery.
Causes and symptoms
One of the earliest signs of mechanical intestinal
obstruction is abdominalpain or cramps that come
and go in waves. Infants typically pull up their legs and
cry in pain, then stop crying suddenly. They will then
behave normally for as long as 15–30 minutes, only to
start crying again when the next cramp begins. The
cramping results from the inability of the muscular
contractions of the bowel to push the digested food
past the obstruction.
Vomiting is another symptom of intestinal
obstruction. The speed of its onset is a clue to the
location of the obstruction. Vomiting follows shortly
after the pain if the obstruction is in the small intestine
but is delayed if it is in the large intestine. The vomited
material may be fecal in character. When the patient
has a mechanical obstruction, the doctor will first hear
active, high-pitched gurgling and splashing bowel
sounds while listening with a stethoscope. Later these
sounds decrease, then stop. If the blockage is com-
plete, the patient will not pass any gas or feces. If the
blockage is only partial, however, the patient may
have diarrhea. Initially there is little or nofever.
When the material in the bowel cannot move past
the obstruction, the body reabsorbs large amounts of
fluid and the abdomen becomes sore to the touch and
swollen. The balance of certain important chemicals
(electrolytes) in the blood is upset. Persistent vomiting
can cause the patient to become dehydrated. Without
treatment, the patient can suffershock and kidney
failure.
Strangulation occurs when a loop of the intestine
is cut off from its blood supply. Strangulation occurs
in about 25% of cases of small bowel obstruction. It is
a serious condition that can progress to gangrene
within six hours.
Diagnosis
Imaging studies
If the doctor suspects intestinal obstruction based
on thephysical examinationand patient history, he or
she will order x rays, a computed tomography scan
(CT scan), or an ultrasound evaluation of the abdomen.
In many cases the patient is given abarium enema.
Barium sulfate, which is a white powder, is inserted
through the rectum and the intestinal area is photo-
graphed. Barium acts as a contrast material and allows
the location of the obstruction to be pinpointed on film.
Laboratory tests
The first blood test of a patient with an intestinal
obstruction usually gives normal results, but later tests
indicate electrolyte imbalances. There is no way to
determine if an obstruction is simple or strangulated
except surgery.
Treatment
Initial assessment
All patients with suspected intestinal obstruction
are hospitalized. Treatment must be rapid, because
strangulating obstructions can be fatal. The first step
in treatment is inserting a nasogastric tube to suction
out the contents of the stomach and intestines. The
patient is then given intravenous fluids to prevent
dehydration and correct electrolyte imbalances.
Intestinal obstructions
Nonsurgical approaches
Surgery can be avoided for some patients. In some
cases of volvulus, guiding a rectal tube into the intes-
tines will straighten the twisted bowels. In infants,
a barium enema may reverse intussusception in
50–90%. An air enema is sometimes used instead of
a barium enema. This treatment successfully relieves
the obstruction in many infants. The children are
usually hospitalized for observation for two to three
days after these procedures. In patients with only
partial obstruction, a barium enema may dissolve the
blockage.
Surgical treatment
If these efforts fail, surgery is necessary.
Strangulated obstructions require emergency surgery.
The obstructed area is removed and part of the bowel
is cut away. If the obstruction is caused by tumors,
polyps, or scar tissue, they are removed. Hernias, if
present, are repaired.Antibiotics are given to reduce
the possibility of infection.
Alternative treatment
Alternative practitioners offer few suggestions for
treatment. They focus on preventive strategies,
particularly the use of high-fiber diets to keep the
bowels healthy through regular elimination.
Prognosis
Mortality
Untreated intestinal obstructions can be fatal.
Delayed diagnosis of volvulus in infants has a mort-
ality rate of 23–33% with prompt diagnosis and
treatment the mortality rate is 3–9%. The bowel either
strangulates or perforates, causing massive infection.
With prompt treatment, however, most patients
recover without complications.
Recurrence
As many as 80% of patients whose volvulus is
treated without surgery have recurrences. Recurrences
in infants with intussusception are most likely to hap-
pen during the first 36 hours after the blockage has been
cleared. The mortality rate for unsuccessfully treated
infants is 1–2%.
Prevention
Most cases of intestinal obstruction are not pre-
ventable. Surgery to remove tumors, polyps, or gall-
stones helps prevent recurrences.
Resources
BOOKS
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD, editors.
‘‘Mechanical Intestinal Obstruction.’’ Section 3,
Chapter 25. InThe Merck Manual of Diagnosis and
Therapy. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research
Laboratories, 2004.
PERIODICALS
Chahine, A. Alfred, MD. ‘‘Intussusception.’’eMedicine
June 10, 2004. <http://www.emedicine.com/ped/
topic1208.htm> .
Dray, X., T. Bienvenu, N. Desmazes-Dufeu, et al. ‘‘Distal
Intestinal Obstruction Syndrome in Adults with Cystic
Fibrosis.’’ Clinical Gastroenterology and Hepatology
2 (June 2004): 498–503.
Emil, S., T. Nguyen, J. Sills, and G. Padilla. ‘‘Meconium
Obstruction in Extremely Low-Birth-Weight Neonates:
Guidelines for Diagnosis and Management.’’Journal of
Pediatric Surgery39 (May 2004): 731–737.
Hebra, Andre, MD, and Melissa Miller, MD. ‘‘Intestinal
Volvulus.’’ eMedicine February 25, 2004. <http://
www.emedicine.com/ped/topic1205.htm> .
Sajja, S. B., and M. Schein. ‘‘Early Postoperative Small
Bowel Obstruction.’’British Journal of Surgery91
(June 2004): 683–691.
KEY TERMS
Electrolytes— Salts and minerals that ionize in body
fluids. Electrolytes control the body’s fluid balance
as well as performing other important functions.
Gangrene— The death of soft tissue in any part of
the body when the blood supply is obstructed.
Ileus— Obstruction of the intestines caused by the
absence of peristalsis.
Intussusception— The slipping or telescoping of
one part of the intestine into the section next to it.
Meconium— A greenish fecal material that forms
the first bowel movement of an infant.
Peristalsis— The waves of muscular contraction in
the intestines that push the food along during the
process of digestion.
Strangulated obstruction— An obstruction in which
a loop of the intestine has its blood supply cut off.
Volvulus— A twisting of the intestine that causes an
obstruction.
2052 Intestinal obstructions
OTHER
HealthAnswers.com. ‘‘Intestinal Obstruction.’’ <http://
www.healthanswers.com/database/ami/converted/
000260.html> .
‘‘Intussusception: A Case Study for Nurses.’’University of
New Brunswick Nursing Faculty Page.<http://
www.unb.ca/courses/nur4284/intu.htm> .
Tish Davidson, A.M.
Rebecca Frey, PhD
Intestinal polyps
Definition
The word polyp refers to any overgrowth of tissue
from the surface of mucous membranes. Intestinal
polyps grow out of the lining of the small and large
bowels. Polyps come in a variety of shapes–round,
droplet, and irregular being the most common.
Description
Polyps are one of many forms of tissue over-
production that can occur in the body. Cells in many
body tissues sometimes keep growing beyond their
usual limits. Medical scientists call this processneopla-
sia, which means simply ‘‘new growth.’’ An individual
overgrowth is called a neoplasm. In most cases these
growths are limited, and the result is a benign swelling
or mass of cells called a tumor. If the new growth
occurs on the surface of the tissue instead of inside
an organ it is often called a polyp.Cancer is another
type of neoplasm marked by unlimited tissue growth.
The essential feature that distinguishes cancer from
nonmalignant neoplasms is that it does not stop
growing.
Intestinal polyps are a common form of neo-
plasm. All intestinal polyps arise from the inner lining
of the intestinal wall. This layer of mucosal tissue does
the work of digestion. About 30% of the general
population will develop intestinal polyps at some
point in life, with the likelihood increasing with age.
Most of these polyps are never noticed during a
person’s lifetime because they cause no problems.
They are often discovered accidentally at autopsy.
The primary importance of intestinal polyps is that
1% of them become cancerous. Because the polyps
that eventually turn malignant cannot be identified
in advance, they are all suspect.
Location of intestinal polyps
The chances of a polyp’s becoming cancerous
depend to some extent on its location within the
digestive tract.
COLON. Ninety-five percent of all intestinal
polyps develop inside the large bowel. There are
several hereditary diseases that produce large numbers
of intestinal polyps. These disorders include:
/C15Familial polyposis of the colon.
/C15Gardner’s syndrome.
/C15Lynch’s syndrome.
/C15Turcot’s syndrome.
/C15Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
/C15Juvenile polyposis.
All of these disorders are inherited in what is
called an autosomal dominant pattern. This pattern
means that the disorders are not sex-linked and that a
child can inherit the disorder from either parent. In all
of these hereditary disorders, the intestinal polyps
appear during or afterpuberty. The first four diseases
on the list have such a high rate of cancer of the large
bowel (colon)–virtually 100% by the age of 40–that
persons diagnosed with any of them should have the
colon removed surgically in early adulthood.
STOMACH. The stomach’s lining is host to polyps
of a similar appearance, but there is no agreement as to
their potential for becomingstomach cancer.
SMALL INTESTINE. Polyps in the small bowel do not
seem to have malignant potential. Instead they can
produce obstruction in either of two ways. A large
polyp can obstruct the bowel by its sheer size.
Smaller polyps can be picked up by the rhythmic
contractions (peristalsis) of the intestines and pull the
part of the bowel to which they are attached into the
adjoining section. The result is a telescoping of one
section of bowel into another, calledintussusception.
Causes and symptoms
Population studies of colon cancer suggest that
diet plays an important role in the disease, and by
implication in the formation of colon polyps. The
most consistent interpretation of these data is that
animal fats—though not vegetable fats—are the single
most important dietary factor. Lack of fiber in the diet
may also contribute to polyp formation. Other types
of polyps are too rare to produce enough data for
evaluation.
Most polyps cause no symptoms. Large ones even-
tually cause intestinal obstruction, which produces
Intestinal polyps
cramping abdominalpain with nausea and vomiting.A s
colon polyps evolve into cancers, they begin to produce
symptoms that include bleeding and altered bowel
habits.
Diagnosis
Routine screening for bowel cancer is recom-
mended for everyone over the age of 40. Screening
may be as simple as testing the stool for blood or as
elaborate ascolonoscopy. Colonoscopy is a procedure
in which the doctor threads an instrument called a
colonoscope up through the entire large bowel. Most
polyps are in the lower segment of the colon, called the
sigmoid colon. These polyps can be seen with a shorter
scope called a sigmoidoscope. X ray imaging can also
used to look for polyps. For x rays, the colon is first
filled with barium, which is a white substance that
shows up as a shadowed area on the film. The colon
can also be filled with barium and air, which is called a
double contrast study.
Because polyps take about five years to turn into
cancers, routine examinations are recommended every
three years.
Treatment
All polyps should be removed as preventive care.
Most of them can be taken out through a colonoscope.
Complications like obstruction and intussusception
are surgical emergencies.
Prevention
Patients with hereditary disorders associated with
polyps must undergo total colectomy early in adult
life. All children of parents with these disorders should
be screened early in adulthood, because half of them
will have the same disease. For the bulk of the popula-
tion, increased dietary fiber and decreased animal fat
are the best preventives known at present. For the
occasional intestinal polyp that arises in spite of
good dietary habits, routine screening should prevent
it from becoming cancerous.
Resources
BOOKS
Silverstein, Fred E. ‘‘Gastrointestinal Endoscopy.’’ In
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, edited
Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
Intestinal strangulation see Intestinal
obstructions
Intoxication confusional state see Delirium
Intracavity therapy see Radioactive implants
Intracranial abscess see Brain abscess
Intrapartum monitoring see Electronic fetal
monitoring
Intrauterine device see IUD
Intrauterine growth
retardation
Definition
Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) occurs
when the unborn baby is at or below the 10th weight
percentile for his or her age (in weeks).
Description
There are standards or averages in weight for
unborn babies according their age in weeks. When
the baby’s weight is at or below the 10th percentile
for his or her age, it is called intrauterine growth
retardation or fetal growth restriction. These babies
are smaller than they should be for their age. How
much a baby weighs at birth depends not only on
how many weeks old it is, but the rate at which it has
KEY TERMS
Autosomal dominance— A pattern of heredity in
which a trait is inherited without respect to sex and
from either parent. The hereditary diseases associated
with intestinal polyps are all autosomal dominant.
Colectomy— Surgical removal of the large bowel.
Intussusception— The slipping of one section of the
intestine inside an adjoining section. Intussusception
can be caused by small intestinal polyps.
Mucosal— Refers to tissues that produce mucus,
such as the digestive, genital and urinary tracts.
Neoplasm— A new growth of abnormal tissue.
Peristalsis— The rhythmic contractions of muscular
tubes like the intestines that carry the contents
along the tube.
Sigmoid— The S-shaped curve of the large intestine
where the colon joins the rectum.
2054 Intrauterine growth retardation
grown. This growth process is complex and delicate.
There are three phases associated with the develop-
ment of the baby. During the first phase, cells multiply
in the baby’s organs. This occurs from the beginning
of development through the early part of the fourth
month. During the second phase, cells continue to
multiply and the organs grow. In the third phase
(after 32 weeks of development), growth occurs
quickly and the baby may gain as much as 7 ounces
per week. If the delicate process of development and
weight gain is disturbed or interrupted, the baby can
suffer from restricted growth.
IUGR is usually classified as symmetrical or
asymmetrical. In symmetrical IUGR, the baby’s
head and body are proportionately small. In asymme-
trical IUGR, the baby’s brain is abnormally large
when compared to the liver. In a normal infant, the
brain weighs about three times more than the liver. In
asymmetrical IUGR, the brain can weigh five or six
times more than the liver.
Causes and symptoms
Doctors think that the two types of IUGR may be
linked to the time during development that the
problem occurs. Symmetrical IUGR may occur when
the unborn baby experiences a problem during early
development. Asymmetrical IUGR may occur when
the unborn baby experiences a problem during later
development. While not true for all asymmetrical
cases, doctors think that sometimes the placenta may
allow the brain to get more oxygen andnutrition while
the liver gets less.
There are many IUGR risk factors involving the
mother and the baby. A mother is at risk for having a
growth restricted infant if she:
/C15Has had a previous baby who suffered from IUGR
/C15Is small in size
/C15Has poor weight gain and nutrition duringpregnancy
/C15Is socially deprived
/C15Uses substances (like tobacco, narcotics, alcohol)
that can cause abnormal development orbirth defects
/C15Has a vascular disease (likepreeclampsia)
/C15Has chronickidney disease
/C15Has a low total blood volume during early pregnancy
/C15Is pregnant with more than one baby
/C15Has an antibody problem that can make successful
pregnancy difficult (antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome).
Additionally, an unborn baby may suffer from
IUGR if it has:
/C15Exposure to an infection, including Germanmeasles
(rubella), cytomegalovirus, tuberculosis, syphilis,o r
toxoplasmosis
/C15A birth defect (like a severe cardiovascular defect)
/C15A chromosome defect, especially trisomy 18
(Edwards’ syndrome)
/C15A primary disorder of bone or cartilage
/C15A chronic lack of oxygen during development
(hypoxia)
/C15Placenta or umbilical cord defects
/C15Developed outside of the uterus.
Diagnosis
IUGR can be difficult to diagnose and in many
cases doctors are not able to make an exact diagnosis
until the baby is born. A mother who has had a growth
restricted baby is at risk of having another during a
later pregnancy. Such mothers are closely monitored
during pregnancy. The length in weeks of the preg-
nancy must be carefully determined so that the doctor
will know if development and weight gain are appro-
priate. Checking the mother’s weight and abdomen
measurements can help diagnose cases when there
are no other risk factors present. Measuring the girth
of the abdomen is often used as a tool for diagnosing
IUGR. During pregnancy, the healthcare provider
will use a tape measure to record the height of the
upper portion of the uterus (the uterine fundal height).
As the pregnancy continues and the baby grows, the
uterus stretches upward in the direction of the
mother’s head. Between 18 and 30 weeks of gestation,
the uterine fundal height (in cm.) equals the weeks
of gestation. If the uterine fundal height is more than
2–3 cm below normal, then IUGR is suspected.
Ultrasound is used to evaluate the growth of the
baby. Usually, IUGR is diagnosed after week 32 of
pregnancy. This is during the phase of rapid growth
when the baby should be gaining more weight. IUGR
caused by genetic factors or infection may sometimes
be detected earlier.
KEY TERMS
Preeclampsia— Hypertension (high blood pressure)
during pregnancy.
Intrauterine growth retardation
Treatment
There is no treatment that improves fetal growth,
but IUGR babies who are at or near term have the best
outcome if delivered promptly. If IUGR is caused by a
problem with the placenta and the baby is otherwise
healthy, early diagnosis and treatment of the problem
may reduce the chance of a serious outcome.
Prognosis
Babies who suffer from IUGR are at an increased
risk for death, low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), low
body temperature (hypothermia), and abnormal devel-
opment of the nervous system. These risks increase
with the severity of the growth restriction. The growth
that occurs after birth cannot be predicted with
certainty based on the size of the baby when it is
born. Infants with asymmetrical IUGR are more
likely to catch up in growth after birth than are infants
who suffer from prolonged symmetrical IUGR.
However, as of 1998, doctors cannot reliably predict
an infant’s future progress. Each case is unique. Some
infants who have IUGR will develop normally, while
others will have complications of the nervous system
or intellectual problems like learning disorders.I f
IUGR is related to a disease or a genetic defect, the
future of the infant is related to the severity and the
nature of that disorder.
Resources
BOOKS
Cunningham, F. Gary, et al.Williams Obstetrics.20th ed.
Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997.
Linda Jones
Intravenous nutrition see Nutrition through
an intravenous line
Intravenous pyelography see Intravenous
urography
Intravenous rehydration
Definition
Sterile water solutions containing small amounts
of salt or sugar, are injected into the body through
a tube attached to a needle which is inserted into a
vein.
Purpose
Fever, vomiting, anddiarrhea can cause a person
to become dehydrated fairly quickly. Infants and
children are especially vulnerable to dehydration.
Patients can become dehydrated due to an illness,
surgery, or accident. Athletes who have overexerted
themselves may also require rehydration with IV
fluids. An IV for rehydration can be used for several
hours to several days, and is generally used if a patient
cannot drink fluids.
Precautions
Patients receiving IV therapy need to be moni-
tored to ensure that the IV solutions are providing
the correct amounts of fluids andminerals needed.
People with kidney and heart disease are at increased
risk for overhydration, so they must be carefully
monitored when receiving IV therapy.
Description
Basic IV solutions are sterile water with small
amounts of sodium (salt) or dextrose (sugar) supplied
in bottles or thick plastic bags that can hang on a stand
mounted next to the patient’s bed. Additional miner-
als like potassium and calcium,vitamins, or drugs can
be added to the IV solution by injecting them into the
bottle or bag with a needle.
Preparation
A doctor orders the IV solution and any addi-
tional nutrients or drugs to be added to it. The doctor
also specifies the rate at which the IV will be infused.
The IV solutions are prepared under the supervision of
a doctor, pharmacist, or nurse, using sanitary techni-
ques that prevent bacterial contamination. Just like a
prescription, the IV is clearly labeled to show its
contents and the amounts of any additives. The skin
around the area where the needle is inserted is cleaned
and disinfected. Once the needle is in place, it will be
taped to the skin to prevent it from dislodging.
KEY TERMS
Intravenous— Into a vein; a needle is inserted into a
vein in the back of the hand, inside the elbow, or
some other location on the body. Fluids, nutrients,
and drugs can be injected.
2056 Intravenous rehydration