DISEASE: Measles
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Transferrin test
The transferrin test is a direct measurement of
transferrin–which is also called siderophilin–levels in
the blood. Some laboratories prefer this measurement
to the TIBC. The saturation level of the transferrin
can be calculated by dividing the serum iron level by
the TIBC.
Ferritin test
The ferritin test measures the level of a protein in
the blood that stores iron for later use by the body.
Medications that can cause increased ferritin
levels include dietary iron supplements. In addition,
some diseases that do not directly affect the body’s
iron storage can cause artificially high ferritin levels.
These disorders include infections, late-stage cancers,
lymphomas, and severe inflammations. Alcoholics
often have high ferritin levels.
Preparation
Patient history
Before patients are tested for iron, they should be
checked for any of the following factors:
/C15Prescription medications that affect iron levels,
absorption, or storage
/C15Blood transfusion or radioactive medications within
the last four days
/C15Recent extreme stress or sleep deprivation
/C15Recent eating habits. Test results can be affected by
eating large amounts of iron-rich foods shortly
before the blood test.
Fasting
Patients scheduled for an iron level, TIBC, or
transferrin test should fast for 12 hours before the
blood is drawn. They are allowed to drink water.
Patients scheduled for a ferritin test do not need to
fast but they should not have any alcoholic beverages
before the test.
Aftercare
Aftercare consists of routine care of the area
around the venipuncture.
Risks
The primary risk is the possibility of a bruise or
swelling in the area of the venipuncture. The patient
can apply moist warm compresses if there is any
discomfort.
Normal results
Iron level test
Normal serum iron values are as follows:
/C15Adult males: 75–175 micrograms/dL
/C15Adult females: 65–165 micrograms/dL
/C15Children: 50–120 micrograms/dL
/C15Newborns: 100–250 micrograms/dL.
TIBC test
Normal TIBC values are as follows:
/C15Adult males: 300–400 micrograms/dL
/C15Adult females: 300–450 micrograms/dL.
Transferrin test
Normal transferrin values are as follows:
/C15Adult males: 200–400 mg/dL
/C15Adult females: 200–400 mg/dL
/C15Children: 203–360 mg/dL
/C15Newborns: 130–275 mg/dL.
Normal transferrin saturation values are between
30–40%.
Ferritin test
Normal ferritin values are as follows:
/C15Adult males: 20–300 ng/mL
/C15Adult females: 20–120 ng/mL
/C15Children (one month): 200–600 ng/mL
/C15Children (two to five months): 50–200 ng/mL
/C15Children (six months to 15 years): 7–140 ng/mL
/C15Newborns: 25–200 ng/mL.
Abnormal results
Iron level test
Serum iron level isincreased in thalassemia, hemo-
chromatosis, severe hepatitis,liver disease, lead poison-
ing, acute leukemia, and kidney disease. It is also
increased by multiple blood transfusions and intra-
muscular iron injections.
Iron tests
Iron levels above 350–500 micrograms/dL are
considered toxic; levels over 1000 micrograms/dL
indicate severe iron poisoning.
Serum iron level isdecreased in iron deficiency
anemia, chronic blood loss, chronic diseases (lupus,
rheumatoid arthritis ), late pregnancy, chronically
heavy menstrual periods, and thyroid deficiency.
TIBC test
The TIBC isincreased in iron deficiency anemia,
polycythemia vera, pregnancy, blood loss, severe hepa-
titis, and the use of birth control pills.
The TIBC is decreased in malnutrition, severe
burns, hemochromatosis, anemia caused by infections
and chronic diseases,cirrhosis of the liver, and kidney
disease.
Transferrin test
Transferrin isincreased in iron deficiency anemia,
pregnancy, hormone replacement therapy(HRT), and
the use of birth control pills.
Transferrin isdecreased in protein deficiency, liver
damage, malnutrition, severe burns, kidney disease,
chronic infections, and certain genetic disorders.
Ferritin test
Ferritin isincreased in liver disease, iron overload
from hemochromatosis, certain types of anemia, acute
leukemia, Hodgkin’s disease, breast cancer, thalasse-
mia, infections, inflammatory diseases, and hemosi-
derosis. Ferritin levels may be normal or slightly
above normal in patients with kidney disease.
Ferritin isdecreased in chronic iron deficiency and
severe protein depletion.
Resources
BOOKS
Pagana, Kathleen Deska.Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998.
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Irregular bite see Malocclusion
Irritable bowel syndrome
Definition
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a common
intestinal condition characterized by abdominalpain
and cramps; changes in bowel movements (diarrhea,
constipation, or both); gassiness; bloating;nausea; and
other symptoms. There is no cure for IBS. Much about
the condition remains unknown or poorly understood;
however, dietary changes, drugs, and psychological
treatment are often able to eliminate or substantially
reduce its symptoms.
Description
IBS is the name people use today for a condition
that was once called–among other things–colitis,
mucous colitis, spastic colon, nervous colon, spastic
bowel, and functional bowel disorder. Some of these
names reflected the now outdated belief that IBS is a
purely psychological disorder, a product of the
patient’s imagination. Although modern medicine
KEY TERMS
Anemia— A disorder marked by low hemoglobin
levels in red blood cells, which leads to a defi-
ciency of oxygen in the blood.
Ferritin— A protein found in the liver, spleen, and
bone marrow that stores iron.
Hemochromatosis— A disorder of iron absorption
characterized by bronze-colored skin. It can cause
painful joints, diabetes, and liver damage if the iron
concentration is not lowered.
Hemosiderosis— An overload of iron in the body
resulting from repeated blood transfusions.
Hemosiderosis occurs most often in patients with
thalassemia.
Iron poisoning— A potentially fatal condition
caused by swallowing large amounts of iron dietary
supplements. Most cases occur in children who
have taken adult- strength iron formulas. The symp-
toms of iron poisoning include vomiting, bloody
diarrhea, convulsions, low blood pressure, and
turning blue.
Plasma— The liquid part of blood.
Siderophilin— Another name for transferrin.
Thalassemia— A hereditary form of anemia that
occurs most frequently in people of Mediterranean
origin.
Transferrin— A protein in blood plasma that carries
iron derived from food intake to the liver, spleen,
and bone marrow.
2068 Irritable bowel syndrome
recognizes thatstress can trigger IBS attacks, medical
specialists agree that IBS is a genuine physical
disorder–or group of disorders–with specific identifi-
able characteristics.
No one knows for sure how many Americans
suffer from IBS. Surveys indicate a range of 10–20%,
with perhaps as many as 30% of Americans experien-
cing IBS at some point in their lives. IBS normally
makes its first appearance during young adulthood,
and in half of all cases symptoms begin before age 35.
Women with IBS outnumber men by two to one, for
reasons that are not yet understood. IBS is responsible
for more time lost from work and school than any
medical problem other than the common cold.I t
accounts for a substantial proportion of the patients
seen by specialists in diseases of the digestive system
(gastroenterologists). Yet only half–possibly as few as
15%–of IBS sufferers ever consult a doctor.
Causes and symptoms
Symptoms
The symptoms of IBS tend to rise and fall in inten-
sity rather than growing steadily worse over time. They
always include abdominal pain, which may be relieved
by defecation; diarrhea or constipation; or diarrhea
alternating with constipation. Other symptoms–which
vary from person to person–include cramps; gassiness;
bloating; nausea; a powerful and uncontrollable urge to
defecate (urgency); passage of a sticky fluid (mucus)
during bowel movements; or the feeling after finishing
a bowel movement that the bowels are still not comple-
tely empty. The accepted diagnostic criteria–known as
the Rome criteria–require at least three months of con-
tinuous or recurrent symptoms before IBS can be con-
firmed. According to Christine B. Dalton and Douglas
A. Drossman in theAmerican Family Physician,an
estimated 70% of IBS cases can be described as
‘‘mild;’’ 25% as ‘‘moderate;’’ and 5% as ‘‘severe.’’ In
mild cases the symptoms are slight. As a general rule,
they are not present all the time and do not interfere
with work and other normal activities. Moderate
IBS occasionally disrupts normal activities and may
cause some psychological problems. People with severe
IBS often find living a normal life impossible and
experience crippling psychological problems as a result.
For some the physical pain is constant and intense.
Causes
Researchers remain unsure about the cause or
causes of IBS. It is called a functional disorder
because it is thought to result from changes in the
activity of the major part of the large intestine (the
colon). After food is digested by the stomach and
small intestine, the undige sted material passes in
liquid form into the colon, which absorbs water and
salts. This process may take several days. In a healthy
person the colon is quiet during most of that period
except after meals, when its muscles contract in a
series of wavelike movements called peristalsis.
Peristalsis helps absorption by bringing the undi-
gested material into contact with the colon wall. It
also pushes undigested material that has been con-
verted into solid or semisolid feces toward the
rectum, where it remains until defecation. In IBS,
however, the normal rhythm and intensity of peri-
stalsis is disrupted. Som etimes there is too little
peristalsis, which can slow the passage of undigested
material through the colon and cause constipation.
Sometimes there is too much, which has the opposite
effect and causes diarrhea. A Johns Hopkins
University study found that healthy volunteers
experienced 6–8 contractions of the colon each day,
compared with up to 25 contractions a day for volun-
teers suffering from IBS withd i a r r h e a ,a n da na l m o s t
complete absence of contractions among constipated
IBS volunteers. In addition to differences in the
number of contractions, many of the IBS volunteers
experienced powerful spasmodic contractions affect-
ing a larger-than-normal area of the colon–‘‘like
having a Charlie horse in the gut,’’ according to one
of the investigators.
DIET. Some kinds of food and drink appear to
play a key role in triggering IBS attacks. Food and
drink that healthy people can ingest without any
trouble may disrupt peristalsis in IBS patients, which
probably explains why IBS attacks often occur shortly
after meals. Chocolate, milk products, caffeine
(in coffee, tea, colas, and other drinks), and large
quantities of alcohol are some of the chief culprits.
Other kinds of food have also been identified as
problems, however, and the pattern of what can and
cannot be tolerated is different for each person.
Characteristically, IBS symptoms rarely occur at
night and disrupt the patient’s sleep.
STRESS. Stress is an important factor in IBS
because of the close nervous system connections
between the brain and the intestines. Although
researchers do not yet understand all of the links
between changes in the nervous system and IBS, they
point out the similarities between mild digestive upsets
and IBS. Just as healthy people can feel nauseated or
have an upset stomach when under stress, people with
IBS react the same way, but to a greater degree.
Finally, IBS symptoms sometimes intensify during
Irritable bowel syndrome
menstruation, which suggests that female reproduc-
tive hormones are another trigger.
Diagnosis
Diagnosing IBS is a fairly complex task because
the disorder does not produce changes that can be
identified during aphysical examinationor by labora-
tory tests. When IBS is suspected, the doctor (who can
be either a family doctor or a specialist) needs to
determine whether the patient’s symptoms satisfy the
Rome criteria. The doctor must rule out other condi-
tions that resemble IBS, such asCrohn’s disease and
ulcerative colitis. These disorders are ruled out by
questioning the patient about his or her physical and
mental health (the medical history), performing a
physical examination, and ordering laboratory tests.
Normally the patient is asked to provide a stool sam-
ple that can be tested for blood and intestinal para-
sites. In some cases x rays or an internal examination
of the colon using a flexible instrument inserted
through the anus (a sigmoidoscope or colonoscope)
is necessary. The doctor also may ask the patient to try
a lactose-free diet for two or three weeks to see
whether lactose intoleranceis causing the symptoms.
Treatment
Dietary changes, sometimes supplemented by
drugs or psychotherapy, are considered the key to
successful treatment. The following approach, offered
by Dalton and Drossman, is typical of the advice
found in the medical literature on IBS. The authors
tie their approach to the severity of the patient’s
symptoms:
Mild symptoms
Dalton and Drossman recommend a low-fat,
high-fiber diet. Problem-causing substances such as
lactose, caffeine, beans, cabbage, cucumbers, broccoli,
fatty foods, alcohol, and medications should be
identified and avoided. Bran or 15-25 grams a day
of an over-the-counter psyllium laxative (Metamucil
or Fiberall) may also help both constipation and diar-
rhea. The patient can still have milk or milk products if
lactose intolerance is not a problem. People with irre-
gular bowel habits–particularly constipated patients–
may be helped by establishing set times for meals and
bathroom visits.
Moderate symptoms
The advice given by Dalton and Drossman in mild
cases applies here as well. They also suggest that
patients keep a diary of symptoms for two or three
weeks, covering daily activities including meals, and
emotional responses to events. The doctor can then
review the diary with the patient to identify possible
problem areas.
Although a high-fiber diet remains the standard
treatment for constipated patients, suchlaxatives as
lactulose (Chronulac) or sorbitol may be prescribed.
Loperamide (Imodium) and cholestyramine (Questran)
are suggested for diarrhea. Abdominal pain after
meals can be reduced by takingantispasmodic drugs
such as hyoscyamine (Anaspaz, Cystospaz, or Levsin)
or dicyclomine (Bemote, Bentyl, or Di-Spaz) before
eating.
Dalton and Drossman also suggest psychological
counseling or behavioral therapy for some patients to
reduce anxiety and to learn to cope with the pain and
other symptoms of IBS. Relaxation therapy, hypnosis,
biofeedback, and cognitive-behavioral therapy are
examples of behavioral therapy.
Severe symptoms
When IBS produces constant pain that interferes
with everyday life,antidepressant drugs can help by
blocking pain transmission from the nervous system.
Dalton and Drossman also underscore the importance
Normal and diseased (center) colons. Areas of constriction in
the colon cause constipation, while areas of distention cause
diarrhea. (John Bavosi/Science Photo Library. Custom Medical
Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
2070 Irritable bowel syndrome
of an ongoing and supportive doctor-patient
relationship.
Alternative treatment
Alternative and mainstream approaches to IBS
treatment overlap to a certain extent. Like mainstream
doctors, alternative practitioners advise a high-fiber
diet to reduce digestive system irritation. They also
suggest avoiding alcohol, caffeine, and fatty, gassy,
or spicy foods. Recommended stress management
techniques include yoga, meditation, hypnosis, bio-
feedback, andreflexology. Reflexology is a technique
of foot massage that is thought to relieve diarrhea,
constipation, and other IBS symptoms.
Alternative medicine also emphasizes such herbal
remedies as ginger (Zingiber officinale), buckthorn
(Rhamnus purshiana), and enteric-coated peppermint
oil. Enteric coating prevents digestion until the pep-
permint oil reaches the small intestine, thus avoiding
irritation of the upper part of the digestive tract.
Chamomile (Matricaria recutita), valerian (Valeriana
officinalis), rosemary (Rosemarinus officinalis), lemon
balm (Melissa officinalis), and other herbs are recom-
mended for their antispasmodic properties. The list of
alternative treatments for IBS is in fact quite long. It
includes aromatherapy, homeopathy, hydrotherapy,
juice therapy, acupuncture, chiropractic, osteopathy,
naturopathic medicine, and Chinese traditional herbal
medicine.
Prognosis
IBS is not a life-threatening condition. It does
not cause intestinal bleeding or inflammation, nor
does it cause other bowel diseases or cancer.
Although IBS can last a lifetime, in up to 30% of
cases the symptoms eventually disappear. Even if the
symptoms cannot be eliminated, with appropriate
treatment they can usually be brought under control
to the point where IBS becomes merely an occasional
inconvenience. Treatment requires a long-term
commitment, however; six months or more may be
needed before the patient notices substantial
improvement.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal
Disorders. P.O. Box 17864, Milwaukee, WI 53217.
(888) 964-2001. <http://www.iffgd.org> .
National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse.
2 Information Way, Bethesda, MD 20892-3570. (800)
891-5389. <http://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/digest/
nddic.htm> .
Howard Baker
Ischemia
Definition
Ischemia is an insufficient supply of blood to an
organ, usually due to a blocked artery.
Description
Myocardial ischemia is an intermediate condition
in coronary artery diseaseduring which the heart tissue
is slowly or suddenly starved of oxygen and other
nutrients. Eventually, the affected heart tissue will
die. When blood flow is completely blocked to the
heart, ischemia can lead to aheart attack. Ischemia
can be silent or symptomatic. According to the
American Heart Association, up to four million
Americans may have silent ischemia and be at high
risk of having a heart attack with no warning.
KEY TERMS
Anus— The opening at the lower end of the rectum.
Crohn’s disease— A disease characterized by
inflammation of the intestines. Its early symptoms
may resemble those of IBS.
Defecation— Passage of feces through the anus.
Feces— Undigested food and other waste that is
eliminated through the anus. Feces are also called
fecal matter or stools.
Lactose— A sugar found in milk and milk products.
Some people are lactose i ntolerant, meaning
they have trouble digesting lactose. Lactose intol-
erance can produce symptoms resembling those
of IBS.
Peristalsis— The periodic waves of muscular con-
tractions that move food through the intestines
during the process of digestion.
Ulcerative colitis— A disease that inflames and
causes breaks (ulcers) in the colon and rectum,
which are parts of the large intestine.
Ischemia
Symptomatic ischemia is characterized by chest
pain called angina pectoris. The American Heart
Association estimates that nearly seven million
Americans have angina pectoris, usually called
angina. Angina occurs more frequently in women
than in men, and in blacks and Hispanics more than
in whites. It also occurs more frequently as people
age–25% of women over the age of 85 and 27% of
men who are 80–84 years old have angina.
People with angina are at risk of having a heart
attack. Stable angina occurs during exertion, can be
quickly relieved by resting or taking nitroglycerine,
and lasts from three to twenty minutes. Unstable
angina, which increases the risk of a heart attack,
occurs more frequently, lasts longer, is more severe,
and may cause discomfort during rest or light
exertion.
Ischemia can also occur in the arteries of the
brain, where blockages can lead to astroke. About
80–85% of all strokes are ischemic. Most blockages in
the cerebral arteries are due to a blood clot, often in
an artery narrowed by plaque. Sometimes, a blood
clot in the heart or aorta travels to a cerebral artery.
A transient ischemic attack(TIA) is a ‘‘mini-stroke’’
caused by a temporary deficiency of blood supply to
the brain. It occurs suddenly, lasts a few minutes to
a few hours, and is a strong warning sign of an
impending stroke. Ischemia can also effect intestines,
legs, feet and kidneys. Pain, malfunctions, and damage
in those areas may result.
Causes and symptoms
Ischemia is almost always caused by blockage of
an artery, usually due to atherosclerotic plaque.
Myocardial ischemia is also caused by blood clots
(which tend to form on plaque), artery spasms or
contractions, or any of these factors combined. Silent
ischemia is usually caused by emotional or mental
stress or by exertion, but there are no symptoms.
Angina is usually caused by increased oxygen demand
when the heart is working harder than usual, for
example, duringexercise, or during mental or physical
stress. According to researchers at Harvard
University, physical stress is harder on the heart than
mental stress. A TIA is caused by a blood clot briefly
blocking a cerebral artery.
Risk factors
The risk factors for myocardial ischemia are the
same as those for coronary artery disease. For TIA,
coronary artery disease is also a risk factor.
/C15Heredity. People whose parents have coronary artery
disease are more likely to develop it. African
Americans are also at higher risk.
/C15Sex. Men are more likely to have heart attacks than
women, and to have them at a younger age.
/C15Age. Men who are 45 years of age and older and
women who are 55 years of age and older are con-
sidered to be at risk.
/C15Smoking. Smoking increases both the chance of
developing coronary artery disease and the chance
of dying from it. Second hand smoke may also
increase risk.
/C15High cholesterol. Risk of developing coronary artery
disease increases as blood cholesterol levels increase.
When combined with other factors, the risk is even
greater.
/C15High blood pressure. High blood pressure makes the
heart work harder, and with time, weakens it. When
combined withobesity, smoking, high cholesterol, or
diabetes, the risk of heart attack or stroke increases
several times.
/C15Lack of physical activity. Lack of exercise increases
the risk of coronary artery disease.
/C15Diabetes mellitus. The risk of developing coronary
artery disease is seriously increased for diabetics.
/C15Obesity. Excess weight increases the strain on the
heart and increases the risk of developing coronary
artery disease, even if no other risk factors are pre-
sent. Obesity increases blood pressure and blood
cholesterol, and can lead to diabetes.
/C15Stress and anger. Some scientists believe that
stress and anger can contribute to the develop-
ment of coronary artery disease. Stress increases
the heart rate and blood pressure and can injure
the lining of the arteries. Angina attacks often
occur after anger, as do many heart attacks and
strokes.
Angina symptoms include:
/C15A tight, squeezing, heavy, burning, orchoking pain
that is usually beneath the breastbone—the pain may
spread to the throat, jaw, or one arm
/C15A feeling of heaviness or tightness that is not painful
/C15A feeling similar to gas or indigestion
/C15Attacks brought on by exertion and relieved by
rest.
If the pain or discomfort continues or intensifies,
immediate medical help should be sought, ideally
within 30 minutes.
2072 Ischemia
TIA symptoms include:
/C15Sudden weakness, tingling,o r numbness, usually in
one arm or leg or both the arm and leg on the same
side of the body, as well as sometimes in the face
/C15Sudden loss of coordination
/C15Loss of vision or double vision
/C15Difficulty speaking
/C15Vertigo and loss of balance.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic tests for myocardial ischemia include:
resting, exercise, or ambulatory electrocardiograms;
scintigraphic studies (radioactive heart scans);echo-
cardiography; coronaryangiography; and, rarely,posi-
tron emission tomography. Diagnostic tests for TIA
include physician review of symptoms, computed
tomography scans (CT scans), carotid artery ultra-
sound (Doppler ultrasonography), andmagnetic reso-
nance imaging . Angiography is the best test for
ischemia of any organ.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) shows the heart’s
activity and may reveal a lack of oxygen. Electrodes
covered with conducting jelly are placed on the
patient’s chest, arms, and legs. Impulses of the heart’s
activity are recorded on paper. The test takes about
10 minutes and is performed in a physician’s office.
About 25% of patients with angina have normal elec-
trocardiograms. Another type of electrocardiogram,
the exercisestress test, measures response to exertion
when the patient is exercising on a treadmill or a
stationary bike. It is performed in a physician’s office
or an exercise laboratory and takes 15 to 30 minutes.
This test is more accurate than a resting ECG in
diagnosing ischemia. Sometimes an ambulatory ECG
is ordered. For this test, the patient wears a portable
ECG machine called a Holter monitor for 12, 24, or 48
hours.
Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy and radionu-
clide angiography are nuclear studies involving the
injection of a radioactive material (e.g., thallium)
which is absorbed by healthy tissue. A gamma scintil-
lation camera displays and records a series of images
of the radioactive material’s movement through the
heart. Both tests are usually performed in a hospital’s
nuclear medicine department and take about 30 min-
utes to an hour. A perfusion scan is sometimes per-
formed at the end of a stress test.
An echocardiogram uses sound waves to create an
image of the heart’s chambers and valves. The techni-
cian applies gel to a handheld transducer then presses
it against the patient’s chest. The heart’s sound waves
are converted into an image on a monitor. Performed
in a cardiology outpatient diagnostic laboratory, the
test takes 30 minutes to an hour. It can reveal abnorm-
alities in the heart wall that indicate ischemia, but it
doesn’t evaluate the coronary arteries directly.
Coronary angiography is the most accurate diag-
nostic technique, but it is also the most invasive. It
shows the heart’s chambers, great vessels, and coron-
ary arteries by using a contrast solution and x-ray
technology. A moving picture is recorded of the
blood flow through the coronary arteries. The patient
is awake, but sedated, and connected to ECG electro-
des and an intravenous line. A local anesthetic is
injected. The cardiologist then inserts a catheter into
a blood vessel and guides it into the heart. Coronary
angiography is performed in acardiac catheterization
laboratory and takes from half an hour to two hours.
Positron emission tomography (PET) is a non-
invasive nuclear test used to evaluate the heart tissue.
A PET scanner traces high-energy gamma rays
released from radioactive particles to provide three-
dimensional images of the heart tissue. Performed at a
hospital, it usually takes from one hour to one hour
and 45 minutes. PET is very expensive and not widely
available.
Computed tomography scans (CT scans) and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are computerized
scanning methods. CT scanning uses a thin x-ray beam
to show three-dimensional views of soft tissues. It is
performed at a hospital or clinic and takes less than a
minute. MRI uses a magnetic field to produce clear,
cross-sectional images of soft tissues. The patient lies
on a table which slides into a tunnel-like scanner. It is
usually performed at a hospital and takes about 30
minutes.
Treatment
Angina is treated with drug therapy and surgery.
Drugs such as nitrates, beta-blockers, and calcium
channel blockers relieve chest pain, but they cannot
clear blocked arteries. Aspirin helps prevent blood
clots. Surgical procedures include percutaneous trans-
luminal coronary angioplasty and coronary artery
bypass graft surgery.
Nitroglycerin is the classic treatment for angina. It
quickly relieves pain and discomfort by opening the
coronary arteries and allowing more blood to flow to
the heart.Beta blockersreduce the amount of oxygen
required by the heart during stress. Calcium channel
blockers help keep the arteries open and reduce blood
Ischemia
pressure. Aspirin helps prevent blood clots from form-
ing on plaques.
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty
and coronary artery bypass graft surgery are invasive
procedures which improve blood flow in the coronary
arteries. Percutaneous transluminal coronary angio-
plasty is a non-surgical procedure in which a catheter
tipped with a balloon is threaded from a blood vessel
in the thigh into the blocked artery. The balloon is
inflated, compressing the plaque to enlarge the blood
vessel and open the blocked artery. The balloon is
deflated and the catheter is removed. The procedure
is performed by a cardiologist in a hospital and gen-
erally requires a two-day stay. Sometimes a metal stent
is placed in the artery to prevent closing of the artery.
In coronary artery bypass graft, called bypass
surgery, a detour is built around the coronary artery
blockage with a healthy leg vein or chest wall artery.
The healthy vein or artery then supplies oxygen-rich
blood to the heart. Bypass surgery is major surgery
appropriate for patients with blockages in two or three
major coronary arteries or severely narrowed left main
coronary arteries, as well as those who have not
responded to other treatments. It is performed in a
hospital under general anesthesia using a heart-lung
machine to support the patient while the healthy vein
or artery is attached to the coronary artery.
There are several experimental surgical proce-
dures: atherectomy, where the surgeon shaves off and
removes strips of plaque from the blocked artery; laser
angioplasty, where a catheter with a laser tip is
inserted to burn or break down the plaque; and inser-
tion of a metal coil, called a stent, that can be
implanted permanently to keep a blocked artery
open. This stenting procedure is becoming more com-
mon. Another experimental procedure uses a laser to
drill channels in the heart muscle to increase blood
supply.
TIAs are treated by drugs that control high blood
pressure and reduce the likelihood of blood clots and
surgery. Aspirin is commonly used and anticoagulants
are sometimes used to prevent blood clots. In some
cases, carotidendarterectomy surgery is performed to
help prevent further TIAs. The procedure involves
removing arterial plaque from inside blood vessels.
The use ofchelation therapy, a long-term injection
by a physician of a cocktail of synthetic amino acid,
ethylenediaminetetracetric acid, and anticoagulant
drugs and nutrients, is controversial.
Alternative treatment
Ischemia can be life-threatening. Although there
are alternative treatments for angina, traditional med-
ical care may be necessary. Prevention of the cause of
ischemia, primarily atherosclerosis, is primary. This
becomes even more important for people with a family
history of heart disease. Dietary modifications, espe-
cially the reduction or elimination of saturated fats
(primarily found in meat), are essential. Increased
fiber (found in fresh fruits and vegetables, grains,
and beans) can help the body eliminate excessive cho-
lesterol through the stools. Exercise, particularly aero-
bic exercise, is essential for circulation health. Not
smoking will prevent damage from smoke and the
harmful substances it contains.
Abana, a mixture of herbs andminerals used in
Ayurvedic medicine, can reduce the frequency and
severity of angina attacks. Western herbal medicine
recommends hawthorn ( Crataegus laevigata or
C. oxyacantha) to relieve long-term angina, since it
strengthens the contractility of the heart muscles.
Nutritional supplements and botanical medicines that
act as antioxidants, for example,vitamins Ca n dE ,
selenium, gingko (Gingko biloba), bilberry (Vaccinium
myrtillus), and hawthorn, can help prevent initial
arterial injury that can lead to the formation of plaque
deposits. Cactus (Cactus grandiflorus) is a homeo-
pathic remedy used for pain relief during an attack.
Mind/body relaxation techniques such asyoga and
biofeedback can help control strong emotions and
stress.
Prognosis
In many cases, ischemia can be successfully trea-
ted, but the underlying disease process of
This patient’s foot is affected with ischemia. Ischemia occurs
when there is an insufficient supply of blood to a specific
organ or tissue. (Photograph by Dr. P. Marazzi, Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
2074 Ischemia
atherosclerosis is usually not ‘‘cured.’’ New diagnostic
techniques enable doctors to identify ischemia earlier.
New technologies and surgical procedures can prevent
angina from leading to a heart attack or TIA from
resulting in a stroke. The outcome for patients with
silent ischemia has not been well established.
Prevention
A healthy lifestyle, including eating right, getting
regular exercise, maintaining a healthy weight, not
smoking, drinking in moderation, not using illegal
drugs, controlling hypertension, and managing stress
are practices that can reduce the risk of ischemia pro-
gressing to a heart attack or stroke.
A healthy diet includes a variety of foods that are
low in fat, especially saturated fat; low in cholesterol;
and high in fiber. Plenty of fruits and vegetables
should be eaten and sodium should be limited. Fat
should comprise no more than 30% of total daily
calories. Cholesterol should be limited to about 300
mg and sodium to about 2,400 mg per day.
Moderate aerobic exercise lasting about 30 min-
utes four or more times per week is recommended for
maximum heart health, according to the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention and the American
College of Sports Medicine. Three 10-minute exercise
periods are also beneficial. If any risk factors are pre-
sent, a physician’s clearance should be obtained before
starting exercise.
Maintaining a desirable body weight is also
important. People who are 20% or more over their
ideal body weight have an increased risk of developing
coronary artery disease or stroke.
Smoking has many adverse effects on the heart
and arteries, so should be avoided. Heart damage
caused by smoking can be improved by quitting.
Several studies have shown that ex-smokers face the
same risk of heart disease as non-smokers within five
to ten years of quitting.
Excessive drinking can increase risk factors for
heart disease. Modest consumption of alcohol, how-
ever, can actually protect against coronary artery dis-
ease. The American Heart Association defines
moderate consumption as one ounce of alcohol per
day–roughly one cocktail, one 8-ounce glass of wine,
or two 12-ounce glasses of beer.
Commonly used illegal drugs can seriously harm
the heart and should never be used. Even stimulants
like ephedra anddecongestants like pseudoephedrine
can be harmful to patients with hypertension or heart
disease.
Treatment should be sought for hypertension.
High blood pressure can be completely controlled
through lifestyle changes and medication. Stress,
which can increase the risk of a heart attack or stroke,
should also be managed. While it cannot always be
avoided, it can be controlled.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave.
Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. <http://
www.americanheart.org> .
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105,
Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. <http://
www.nhlbi.nih.gov> .
Texas Heart Institute. Heart Information Service. P.O. Box
20345, Houston, TX 77225-0345. <http://
www.tmc.edu/thi> .
Lori De Milto
Isocarboxazid see Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors
Isolation
Definition
Isolation refers to the precautions that are taken
in the hospital to prevent the spread of an infectious
KEY TERMS
Atherosclerosis— A process in which the walls of
the arteries thicken due to the accumulation of pla-
que in the blood vessels. Atherosclerosis is the
cause of most coronary artery disease.
Coronary artery disease— A narrowing or block-
age, due to atherosclerosis, of the arteries that pro-
vide oxygen and nutrients to the heart. When blood
flow is cut-off, the result is a heart attack.
Plaque— A deposit of fatty and other substances that
accumulate in the lining of the artery wall.
Stroke— A sudden decrease or loss of conscious-
ness caused by rupture or blockage of a blood vessel
by a blood clot or hemorrhage in the brain.
Ischemic strokes are caused by blood clots in a
cerebral artery.
Isolation
agent from an infected or colonized patient to suscep-
tible persons.
Purpose
Isolation practices are designed to minimize the
transmission of infection in the hospital, using current
understanding of the way infections can transmit.
Isolation should be done in a user friendly, well-
accepted, inexpensive way that interferes as little as
possible with patient care, minimizes patient discom-
fort, and avoids unnecessary use.
Precautions
The type of precautions used should be viewed as
a flexible scale that may range from the least to the
most demanding methods of prevention. These meth-
ods should always take into account that differences
exist in the way that diseases are spread. Recognition
and understanding of these differences will avoid use
of insufficient or unnecessary interventions.
Description
Isolation practices can include placement in a pri-
vate room or with a select roommate, the use of pro-
tective barriers such as masks, gowns and gloves, a
special emphasis on handwashing (which is always
very important), and special handling of contaminated
articles. Because of the differences among infectious
diseases, more than one of these precautions may be
necessary to prevent spread of some diseases but may
not be necessary for others.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and the Hospital Infection Control Practice
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) have led the way in
defining the guidelines for hospital-based infection
precautions. The most current system recommended
for use in hospitals consists of two levels of precau-
tions. The first level is Standard Precautions which
apply to all patients at all times because signs and
symptoms of infection are not always obvious and
therefore may unknowingly pose a risk for a suscep-
tible person. The second level is known as
Transmission-Based Precautions which are intended
for individuals who have a known or suspected infec-
tion with certain organisms.
Frequently, patients are admitted to the hospital
without a definite diagnosis, but with clues to suggest
an infection. These patients should be isolated with the
appropriate precautions until a definite diagnosis is
made.
Standard Precautions
Standard Precautions define all the steps that
should be taken to prevent spread of infection from
person to person when there is an anticipated contact
with:
/C15Blood
/C15Body fluids
/C15Secretions, such as phlegm
/C15Excretions, such as urine and feces (not including
sweat) whether or not they contain visible blood
/C15Nonintact skin, such as an open wound
/C15Mucous membranes, such as the mouth cavity.
Standard Precautions includes the use of one or
combinations of the following practices. The level of
use will always depend on the anticipated contact with
the patient:
/C15Handwashing, the most importantinfection control
method
/C15Use of latex or other protective gloves
/C15Masks, eye protection and/or face shield
/C15Gowns
/C15Proper handling of soiled patient care equipment
/C15Proper environmental cleaning
/C15Minimal handling of soiled linen
/C15Proper disposal of needles and other sharp equip-
ment such as scalpels
/C15Placement in a private room for patients who cannot
maintain appropriate cleanliness or contain body
fluids.
Transmission Based Precautions
Transmission Based Precautions may be needed
in addition to Standard Precautions for selected
patients who are known or suspected to harbor certain
infections. These precautions are divided into three
categories that reflect the differences in the way infec-
tions are transmitted. Some diseases may require more
than one isolation category.
AIRBORNE PRECAUTIONS. Airborne Precautions
prevent diseases that are transmitted by minute particles
called droplet nuclei or contaminated dust particles.
These particles, because of their size, can remain sus-
pended in the air for long periods of time; even after the
infected person has left the room. Some examples of
diseases requiring these precautions aretuberculosis,
measles,a n dchickenpox.
2076 Isolation
A patient needing Airborne Precautions should be
assigned to a private room with special ventilation
requirements. The door to this room must be closed
at all possible times. If a patient must move from the
isolation room to another area of the hospital, the
patient should be wearing a mask during the trans-
port. Anyone entering the isolation room to provide
care to the patient must wear a special mask called a
respirator.
DROPLET PRECAUTIONS. Droplet Precautions pre-
vent the spread of organisms that travel on particles
much larger than the droplet nuclei. These particles do
not spend much time suspended in the air, and usually
do not travel beyond a several foot range from the
patient. These particles are produced when a patient
coughs, talks, or sneezes. Examples of disease requir-
ing droplet precautions are meningococcalmeningitis
(a serious bacterial infection of the lining of the brain),
influenza, mumps, and German measles (rubella).
Patients who require Droplet Precautions should
be placed in a private room or with a roommate who is
infected with the same organism. The door to the
room may remain open. Health care workers will
need to wear masks within 3 ft of the patient.
Patients moving about the hospital away from the
isolation room should wear a mask.
CONTACT PRECAUTIONS. Contact Precautions
prevent spread of organisms from an infected patient
through direct (touching the patient) or indirect
(touching surfaces or objects that that been in contact
with the patient) contact. Examples of patients who
might be placed in Contact Precautions are those
infected with:
/C15Antibiotic-resistant bacteria
/C15Hepatitis A
/C15Scabies
/C15Impetigo
/C15Lice.
This type of precaution requires the patient to be
placed in a private room or with a roommate who has
the same infection. Health care workers should wear
gloves when entering the room. They should change
their gloves if they touch material that contains large
volumes of organisms such as soiled dressings. Prior to
leaving the room, health care workers should remove
the gloves and wash their hands with medicated soap.
In addition, they may need to wear protective gowns if
there is a chance of contact with potentially infective
materials such as diarrhea or wound drainage that
cannot be contained or if there is likely to be extensive
contact with the patient or environment.
Patient care items, such as a stethoscope, that are
used for a patient in Contact Precautions should not
be shared with other patients unless they are properly
cleaned and disinfected before reuse. Patients should
leave the isolation room infrequently.
Resources
BOOKS
Edmond, M. ‘‘Isolation.’’ InA Practical Handbook for
Hospital Epidemiologists, edited by L. A. Herwaldt and
M. D. Decker. Thorofare, NJ: Slack Inc., 1998.
Suzanne M. Lutwick, MPH
Isoniazid see Antituberculosis drugs
Isosorbide dinitrate see Antiangina drugs
Isotretinoin see Antiacne drugs
Isradipine see Calcium channel blockers
Itching
Definition
Itching is an intense, distracting irritation or tick-
ling sensation that may be felt all over the skin’s sur-
face, or confined to just one area. The medical term for
itching is pruritus.
Description
Itching instinctively leads most people to scratch
the affected area. Different people can tolerate differ-
ent amounts of itching, and anyone’s threshold of
KEY TERMS
Colonized— This occurs when a microorganism is
found on or in a person without causing a disease.
Disinfected— Decreased the number of microor-
ganisms on or in an object.
Latex— A rubber material which gloves and con-
doms are made from.
Phlegm— Another word for sputum; material
coughed up from a person’s airways.
Stethoscope— A medical instrument for listening to
a patient’s heart and lungs.
Itching
tolerance can be changed due tostress, emotions, and
other factors. In general, itching is more severe if the
skin is warm, and if there are few distractions. This is
why people tend to notice itching more at night.
Causes and symptoms
The biology underlying itching is not fully under-
stood. It is believed that itching results from the inter-
actions of several different chemical messengers.
Although itching andpain sensations were at one time
thought to be sent along the same nerve pathways,
researchers reported the discovery in 2003 of itch-spe-
cific nerve pathways. Nerve endings that are specifically
sensitive to itching have been named pruriceptors.
Research into itching has been helped by the
recent invention of a mechanical device called the
Matcher, which electrically stimulates the patient’s
left hand. When the intensity of the stimulation equals
the intensity of itching that the patient is experiencing
elsewhere in the body, the patient stops the stimulation
and the device automatically records the measure-
ment. The Matcher was found to be sensitive to
immediate changes in the patient’s perception of itch-
ing as well as reliable in its measurements.
Stress and emotional upset can make itching worse,
no matter what the underlying cause. If emotional pro-
blems are the primary reason for the itch, the condition
is known as psychogenic itching. Some people become
convinced that their itch is caused by a parasite; this
conviction is often linked to burning sensations in the
tongue, and may be caused by a major psychiatric
disorder.
Generalized itching
Itching that occurs all over the body may indicate
a medical condition such as diabetes mellitus, liver
disease, kidney failure, jaundice, thyroid disorders
(and rarely,cancer). Blood disorders such as leukemia,
and lymphatic conditions such asHodgkin’s disease
may sometimes cause itching as well.
Some people may develop an itch without a rash
when they take certain drugs (such asaspirin, codeine,
cocaine); others may develop an itchy red ‘‘drug rash’’
or hives because of an allergy to a specific drug. Some
medications given to cancer patients may also cause
itching.
Itching also may be caused when any of the family
of hookworm larvae penetrate the skin. This includes
swimmer’s itch and creeping eruption caused by cat or
dog hookworm, and ground itch caused by the ‘‘true’’
hookworm.
Many skin conditions cause an itchy rash. These
include:
/C15Atopic dermatitis
/C15Chickenpox
/C15Contact dermatitis
/C15Dermatitis herpetiformis (occasionally)
/C15Eczema
/C15Fungus infections (such asathlete’s foot)
/C15Hives (urticaria)
/C15Insect bites
/C15Lice
/C15Lichen planus
/C15Neurodermatitis (lichen simplex chronicus)
/C15Psoriasis (occasionally)
/C15Scabies.
On the other hand, itching all over the body can be
caused by something as simple as bathing too often,
which removes the skin’s natural oils and may make
the skin too dry and scaly.
Localized itching
Specific itchy areas may occur if a person comes in
contact with soap, detergents, and wool or other
rough-textured, scratchy material. Adults who have
hemorrhoids, anal fissure, or persistentdiarrhea may
notice itching around the anus (called ‘‘pruritus ani’’).
In children, itching in this area is most likely due to
worms.
Intense itching in the external genitalia in women
(‘‘pruritus vulvae’’) may be due tocandidiasis, hormo-
nal changes, or the use of certain spermicides or vagi-
nal suppositories, ointments, or deodorants.
It is also common for older people to suffer from
dry, itchy skin (especially on the back) for no obvious
reason. Younger people also may notice dry, itchy skin
in cold weather. Itching is also a common complaint
during pregnancy.
Diagnosis
Itching is a symptom that is quite obvious to its
victim. Someone who itches all over should seek med-
ical care. Because itching can be caused by such a wide
variety of triggers, a complete physical exam and med-
ical history will help diagnose the underlying problem.
A variety of blood and stool tests may help determine
the underlying cause.
2078 Itching