DISEASE: Meningitis
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

J
Japanese encephalitis
Definition
Japanese encephalitis is an infection of the brain
caused by a virus. The virus is transmitted to humans
by mosquitoes.
Description
The virus that causes Japanese encephalitis is
called an arbovirus, which is an arthropod-borne
virus. Mosquitoes are a type of arthropod.
Mosquitoes in a number of regions carry this virus
and are responsible for passing it along to humans.
Many of these areas are in Asia, including Japan,
Korea, China, India, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Vietnam, Taiwan, and the Philippines. Areas where
the disease-causing arbovirus is always present are
referred to as being endemic for the disease. In such
areas, blood tests will reveal that more than 70% of all
adults have been infected at some point with the
arbovirus.
Because the virus that causes Japanese encephali-
tis is carried by mosquitoes, the number of people
infected increases during those seasons when mosqui-
toes are abundant. This tends to be in the warmest,
rainiest months. In addition to humans, other animals
like wild birds, pigs, and horses are susceptible to
infection with this arbovirus. Because the specific
type of mosquito carrying the Japanese encephalitis
arbovirus frequently breeds in rice paddies, the disease
is considered to be primarily a rural problem.
Causes and symptoms
The virus is transferred to a human when an
infected mosquito sucks that person’s blood. Once in
the body, the virus travels to various glands where it
multiplies. The virus can then enter the bloodstream.
Ultimately, the virus settles in the brain, where it
causes serious problems.
Japanese encephalitis begins with fever, severe
headache, nausea, andvomiting. As the tissue covering
the brain and spinal cord (the meninges) becomes
infected and swollen, the patient will develop a stiff
and painful neck. By day two or three, the patient
begins to suffer the effects of swelling in the brain.
These effects include:
/C15Problems with balance and coordination
/C15Paralysis of some muscle groups
/C15Tremors
/C15Seizures
/C15Lapses in consciousness
/C15A stiff, mask-like appearance of the face.
The patient becomes dehydrated and loses weight.
If the patient survives the illness, the fever will decrease
by about day seven and the symptoms will begin to
improve by about day 14. Other patients will continue
to have extremely high fevers and their symptoms will
get worse. In these cases,coma and thendeath occur in
7-14 days. Many patients who recover have permanent
disabilities due to brain damage.
Diagnosis
Most diagnostic techniques for Japanese encepha-
litis do not yield results very quickly. The diagnosis is
made primarily on the basis of the patient’s symptoms
and the knowledge of the kinds of illnesses endemic to
a particular geographic region.
Immunofluorescence tests, where special viral mar-
kers react with human antibodies that have been
tagged with a fluorescent chemical, are used to verify
the disease. However, these results tend to be unavail-
able until week two of the infection. Other tests involve
comparing the presence and quantity of particular
antibodies in the blood or spinal fluid during week one
with those present during week two of the illness.
Treatment
There are no treatments available to stop or slow
the progression of Japanese encephalitis. Only the
symptoms of each patient can be treated. Fluids are
given to decreasedehydrationand medications are given
to decrease fever andpain. Medications are available to
attempt to decrease brain swelling. Patients in a coma
may require mechanical assistance with breathing.
Prognosis
While the majority of people infected with arbo-
virus never become sick, those who develop Japanese
encephalitis become very ill. Some outbreaks have a
50% death rate. A variety of long-term problems may
haunt those who recover from the illness. These pro-
blems include:
/C15Movement difficulties where the arms, legs, or body
jerks or writhes involuntarily
/C15Shaking
/C15Paralysis
/C15Inability to control emotions
/C15Loss of mental abilities
/C15Mental disturbances, includingschizophrenia (which
may affect as many as 75% of Japanese encephalitis
survivors).
Young children are most likely to have serious,
long-term problems after an infection.
Prevention
A three-dose vaccine is available for Japanese
encephalitis and is commonly given to young children
in areas where the disease is endemic. Travelers to
these regions can also receive the vaccine.
Controlling the mosquito population with insecti-
cides is another preventive measure. Visitors to
regions with high rates of Japanese encephalitis should
take precautions (like using mosquito repellents and
sleeping under a bed net) to avoid contact with
mosquitoes.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton
Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404)
639-3311. <http://www.cdc.gov> .
Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD
Jaundice
Definition
Jaundice is a condition in which a person’s skin
and the whites of the eyes are discolored yellow due to
an increased level of bile pigments in the blood result-
ing from liver disease. Jaundice is sometimes called
icterus, from a Greek word for the condition.
Description
In order to understand jaundice, it is useful to
know about the role of the liver in producing bile.
The most important function of the liver is the proces-
sing of chemical waste products like cholesterol and
excreting them into the intestines as bile. The liver is
the premier chemical factory in the body—most
incoming and outgoing chemicals pass through it. It
is the first stop for all nutrients, toxins, and drugs
absorbed by the digestive tract. The liver also collects
chemicals from the blood for processing. Many of
these outward-bound chemicals are excreted into the
bile. One particular substance, bilirubin, is yellow.
Bilirubin is a product of the breakdown of hemoglo-
bin, which is the protein inside red blood cells.
If bilirubin cannot leave the body, it accumulates
and discolors other tissues. The normal total level
of bilirubin in blood serum is between 0.2 mg/dL
and 1.2 mg/dL. When it rises to 3 mg/dL or higher,
the person’s skin and the whites of the eyes become
noticeably yellow.
KEY TERMS
Antibody— A type of cell made by the immune
system that has the ability to recognize markers
(antigens) on the surface of invading organisms,
like bacteria and viruses.
Encephalitis— A swelling of the brain, potentially
causing serious brain damage.
Endemic— Naturally and consistently present in a
certain geographical region.
2084 Jaundice
Bile is formed in the liver. It then passes into the
network of hepatic bile ducts, which join to form a
single tube. A branch of this tube carries bile to the
gallbladder, where it is stored, concentrated, and
released on a signal from the stomach. Food entering
the stomach is the signal that stimulates the gallblad-
der to release the bile. The tube, which is called the
common bile duct, continues to the intestines. Before
the common bile duct reaches the intestines, it is joined
by another duct from the pancreas. The bile and the
pancreatic juice enter the intestine through a valve
called the ampulla of Vater. After entering the intes-
tine, the bile and pancreatic secretions together help in
the process of digestion.
Causes and symptoms
There are many different causes for jaundice, but
they can be divided into three categories based on
where they start–before, in, or after the liver (pre-
hepatic, hepatic and post-hepatic). When bilirubin
begins its life cycle, it cannot be dissolved in water.
The liver changes it so that it is soluble in water. These
two types of bilirubin are called unconjugated (inso-
luble) and conjugated (soluble). Blood tests can easily
distinguish between these two types of bilirubin.
Hemoglobin and bilirubin formation
Bilirubin begins as hemoglobin in the blood-form-
ing organs, primarily the bone marrow. If the produc-
tion of red blood cells (RBCs) falls below normal, the
extra hemoglobin finds its way into the bilirubin cycle
and adds to the pool.
Once hemoglobin is in the red cells of the blood, it
circulates for the life span of those cells. The hemoglo-
bin that is released when the cells die is turned into
bilirubin. If for any reason the RBCs die at a faster
rate than usual, bilirubin can accumulate in the blood
and cause jaundice.
Hemolytic disorders
Many disorders speed up the death of red blood
cells. The process of red blood cell destruction is called
hemolysis, and the diseases that cause it are called
hemolytic disorders. If red blood cells are destroyed
faster than they can be produced, the patient develops
anemia. Hemolysis can occur in a number of diseases,
disorders, conditions, and medical procedures:
/C15Malaria. The malaria parasite develops inside red
blood cells. When it is mature it breaks the cell
apart and swims off in the blood. This process hap-
pens to most of the parasites simultaneously, causing
the intermittent symptoms of the disease. When
enough cells burst at once, jaundice may result
from the large amount of bilirubin formed from the
hemoglobin in the dead cells. The pigment may reach
the urine in sufficient quantities to cause ‘‘blackwater
fever,’’ an often lethal form of malaria.
/C15Side effects of certain drugs. Some common drugs
can cause hemolysis as a rare but sudden side effect.
These medications include some antibiotic and anti-
tuberculosis medicines; drugs that regulate the heart-
beat; and levodopa, a drug used to treat Parkinson’s
disease.
/C15Certain drugs in combination with a hereditary
enzyme deficiency known as glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD). G6PD is a deficiency that
affects more than 200 million people in the world.
Some of the drugs listed above are more likely to
cause hemolysis in people with G6PD. Other drugs
cause hemolysis only in people with this disorder.
Most important among these drugs are anti-malarial
medications such as quinine, andvitamins C and K.
/C15Poisons. Snake and spider venom, certain bacterial
toxins, copper, and some organic industrial chemi-
cals directly attack the membranes of red blood cells.
/C15Artificial heart valves. The inflexible moving parts of
heart valves damage RBCs as they flutter back and
forth. This damage is one reason to recommend pig
valves and valves made of other organic materials.
/C15Hereditary RBC disorders. There are a number of
hereditary defects that affect the blood cells. There
are many genetic mutations that affect the hemoglo-
bin itself, the best-known of which issickle cell dis-
ease. Such hereditary disorders as spherocytosis
weaken the outer membrane of the red cell. There
are also inherited defects that involve the internal
chemistry of RBCs.
/C15Enlargement of the spleen. The spleen is an organ
that is located near the upper end of the stomach and
filters the blood. It is supposed to filter out and
destroy only worn-out RBCs. If it has become
enlarged, it filters out normal cells as well. Malaria,
other infections, cancers and leukemias, some of the
hereditary anemias mentioned above, obstruction of
blood flow from the spleen–all these and many more
diseases can enlarge the spleen to the point where it
removes too many red blood cells.
/C15Diseases of the small blood vessels. Hemolysis that
occurs in diseased small blood vessels is called micro-
angiopathic hemolysis. It results from damage
caused by rough surfaces on the inside of the capil-
laries. The RBCs squeeze through capillaries one at a
Jaundice
time and can easily be damaged by scraping against
the vessel walls.
/C15Immune reactions to RBCs. Several types ofcancer
and immune system diseases produce antibodies that
react with RBCs and destroy them. In 75% of cases,
this reaction occurs all by itself, with no underlying
disease to account for it.
/C15Transfusions. If a patient is given an incompatible
blood type, hemolysis results.
/C15Kidney failure and other serious diseases. Several
diseases are characterized by defective blood coagu-
lation that can destroy red blood cells.
/C15Erythroblastosis fetalis. Erythroblastosis fetalis is a
disease of newborns marked by the presence of too
many immature red blood cells (erythroblasts) in the
baby’s blood. When a baby’s mother has a different
blood type, antibodies from the mother may leak
into the baby’s circulation and destroy blood cells.
This reaction can produce severe hemolysis and jaun-
dice in the newborn. Rh factor incompatibility is the
most common cause.
/C15High bilirubin levels in newborns. Even in the
absence of blood type incompatibility, the newborn’s
bilirubin level may reach threatening levels.
Normal jaundice in newborns
Normal newborn jaundice is the result of two
conditions occurring at the same time–a pre-hepatic
and a hepatic source of excess bilirubin. First of all, the
baby at birth immediately begins converting hemoglo-
bin from a fetal type to an adult type. The fetal type of
hemoglobin was able to extract oxygen from the lower
levels of oxygen in the mother’s blood. At birth the
infant can extract oxygen directly from his or her own
lungs and does not need the fetal hemoglobin any
more. So fetal hemoglobin is removed from the system
and replaced with adult hemoglobin. The resulting
bilirubin loads the system and places demands on the
liver to clear it. But the liver is not quite ready for the
task, so there is a period of a week or so when the liver
has to catch up. During that time the baby is
jaundiced.
Hepatic jaundice
Liver diseases of all kinds threaten the organ’s
ability to keep up with bilirubin processing.Starva-
tion, circulating infections, certain medications, hepa-
titis, and cirrhosis can all cause hepatic jaundice, as
can certain hereditary defects of liver chemistry,
including Gilbert’s syndrome and Crigler-Najjar
syndrome.
Post-hepatic jaundice
Post-hepatic forms of jaundice include the jaun-
dices caused by failure of soluble bilirubin to reach the
intestines after it has left the liver. These disorders are
called obstructive jaundices. The most common cause
of obstructive jaundice is the presence ofgallstones in
the ducts of the biliary system. Other causes have to do
with birth defectsand infections that damage the bile
ducts; drugs; infections; cancers; and physical injury.
Some drugs–andpregnancy on rare occasions–simply
cause the bile in the ducts to stop flowing.
Symptoms and complications associated with
jaundice
Certain chemicals in bile may causeitching when
too much of them end up in the skin. In newborns,
insoluble bilirubin may get into the brain and do per-
manent damage. Long-standing jaundice may upset
This patient suffers from obstructive jaundice, which is often
caused by gallstones. (Custom Medical Stock Photo.
Reproduced by permission.)
2086 Jaundice
the balance of chemicals in the bile and cause stones to
form. Apart from these potential complications and
the discoloration of skin and eyes, jaundice by itself is
inoffensive. Other symptoms are determined by the
disease producing the jaundice.
Diagnosis
Physical examination
In many cases the diagnosis of jaundice is sug-
gested by the appearance of the patient’s eyes and
complexion. The doctor will ask the patient to lie flat
on the examining table in order to feel (palpate) the
liver and spleen for enlargement and to evaluate any
abdominal pain. The location and severity of abdom-
inal pain and the presence or absence offever help the
doctor to distinguish between hepatic and obstructive
jaundice.
Laboratory tests
Disorders of blood formation can be diagnosed by
more thorough examination of the blood or the bone
marrow, where blood is made. Occasionally abone
marrow biopsyis required, but usually the blood itself
will reveal the diagnosis. The spleen can be evaluated
by an ultrasound examination or a nuclear scan if the
physical examination has not yielded enough
information.
Liver disease is usually assessed from blood stu-
dies alone, but again a biopsy may be necessary to
clarify less obvious conditions. Aliver biopsy is per-
formed at the bedside. The doctor uses a thin needle to
take a tiny core of tissue from the liver. The tissue
sample is sent to the laboratory for examination
under a microscope.
Assessment of jaundice in newborns
Newborns are more likely to have problems with
jaundice if:
/C15They are premature.
/C15They are Asian or Native Americans.
/C15They have been bruised during the birth process.
/C15They have lost too much weight during the first few
days.
/C15They are born at high altitude.
/C15The mother has diabetes.
/C15Labor had to be induced.
In 2003, research was continuing to find noninva-
sive methods to determine bilirubin levels in newborns
so that physicians did not have to rely on visual exam-
ination alone to determine which infants should
receive blood tests. Once these measurements of skin
pigment can be shown effective and cost-effective in
clinical practice, they may become more available.
Another study used this measurement method incor-
porated into home health visits to monitor babies
within 24 hours of discharge from the hospital follow-
ing birth.
Imaging studies
Disease in the biliary system can be identified by
imaging techniques, of which there are many. X rays
are taken a day after swallowing a contrast agent that
is secreted into the bile. This study gives functional as
well as anatomical information. There are several
ways of injecting contrast dye directly into the bile
ducts. It can be done through a thin needle pushed
A newborn baby undergoes phototherapy with visible blue
light to treat his jaundice. (Photograph by Ron Sutherland,
Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)
Jaundice
straight into the liver or through a scope passed
through the stomach that can inject dye into the
Ampulla of Vater. CT and MRI scans are very useful
for imaging certain conditions like cancers in and
around the liver or gallstones in the common bile duct.
Treatment
Jaundice in newborns
Newborns are the only major category of patients
in whom the jaundice itself requires attention. Because
the insoluble bilirubin can get into the brain, the amount
in the blood must not go over certain levels. If there is
reason to suspect increased hemolysis in the newborn,
the bilirubin level must be measured repeatedly during
the first few days of life. If the level of bilirubin shortly
after birth threatens to go too high, treatment must
begin immediately. Exchanging most of the baby’s
blood was the only way to reduce the amount of bilir-
ubin until a few decades ago. Then it was discovered
that bright blue light rendered the bilirubin harmless.
Now jaundiced babies are fitted with eye protection and
placed under bright fluorescent lights. The light chemi-
cally alters the bilirubin in the blood as it passes through
the baby’s skin. In 2003, researchers were testing a new
drug called Stanate that showed promise in blocking
bilirubin production. However, debate concerning the
use of the drug for treatment of only those infants with
jaundice or as a preventive measure was delaying its
FDA approval and widespread use.
Hemolytic disorders
Hemolytic diseases are treated, if at all, with med-
ications and blood transfusions, except in the case of a
large spleen. Surgical removal of the spleen (splenect-
omy) can sometimes curehemolytic anemia. Drugs that
cause hemolysis or arrest the flow of bile must be
stopped immediately.
Hepatic jaundice
Most liver diseases have no specific cure, but the
liver is so robust that it can heal from severe damage
and regenerate itself from a small remnant of its ori-
ginal tissue.
Post-hepatic jaundice
Obstructive jaundice frequently requires a surgi-
cal cure. If the original passageways cannot be
restored, surgeons have several ways to create alter-
nate routes. A popular technique is to sew an open
piece of intestine over a bare patch of liver. Tiny bile
ducts in that part of the liver will begin to discharge
their bile into the intestine, and pressure from the
obstructed ducts elsewhere will find release in that
direction. As the flow increases, the ducts grow to
accommodate it. Soon all the bile is redirected through
the open pathways.
KEY TERMS
Ampulla of Vater— The widened portion of the
duct through which the bile and pancreatic juices
enter the intestine. Ampulla is a Latin word for a
bottle with a narrow neck that opens into a wide
body.
Anemia— A condition in which the blood does not
contain enough hemoglobin.
Biliary system/Bile ducts— The gall bladder and
the system of tubes that carries bile from the liver
into the intestines.
Bilirubin— A reddish pigment excreted by the liver
into the bile as a breakdown product of
hemoglobin.
Crigler-Najjar syndrome— A moderate to severe
form of hereditary jaundice.
Erythroblastosis fetalis— A disorder of newborn
infants marked by a high level of immature red
blood cells (erythroblasts) in the infant’s blood.
Gilbert’s syndrome— A mild hereditary form of
jaundice.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) defi-
ciency— A hereditary disorder that can lead to
episodes of hemolytic anemia in combination
with certain medications.
Hemoglobin— The red chemical in blood cells that
carries oxygen.
Hemolysis— The destruction or breakdown of red
blood cells.
Hepatic— Refers to the liver.
Icterus— Another name for jaundice.
Microangiopathic— Pertaining to disorders of the
small blood vessels.
Pancreas— The organ beneath the stomach that
produces digestive juices, insulin, and other
hormones.
Sickle cell disease— A hereditary defect in hemo-
globin synthesis that changes the shape of red cells
and makes them more fragile.
Splenectomy— Surgical removal of the spleen.
2088 Jaundice
Prevention
Erythroblastosis fetalis can be prevented by
giving an Rh negative mother a gamma globulin solu-
tion called RhoGAM whenever there is a possibility
that she is developing antibodies to her baby’s blood.
G6PD hemolysis can be prevented by testing patients
before giving them drugs that can cause it. Medication
side effects can be minimized by early detection and
immediate cessation of the drug. Malaria can often be
prevented by certain precautions when traveling in
tropical or subtropical countries. These precautions
include staying in after dark; using prophylactic
drugs such as mefloquine; and protecting sleeping
quarters with mosquito nets treated with insecticides
and mosquito repellents. In 2003, new studies showed
promise for a possible vaccine against malaria. Early
trials showed thatvaccination combination might sti-
mulate T-cell activity against malaria, the best type of
protection that researchers can hope to find. However,
further studies will have to be done.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Grimm, David. ‘‘Baby Pigment Peril.’’U.S. News &World
Report July 28, 2003: 39.
Lawrence, David. ‘‘Combination Malaria Vaccine Shows
Early Promise in Human Trials.’’The LancetMay 31,
2003: 1875.
Morantz, Carrie, and Brian Torrey. ‘‘AHRQ Report on
Neonatal Jaundice.’’American Family PhysicianJune 1,
2003: 2417.
Richmond, Glenn, Melissa Brown, and Patricia Wagstaff.
‘‘Using a Home Care Model to Monitor Bilirubin
Levels in Early Discharged Infants.’’Topics in Health
Information ManagementJanuary–March 2003: 39–43.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Liver Foundation. 1425 Pompton Ave., Cedar
Grove, NJ 07009. (800) 223-0179. <http://www.
liverfoundation.org> .
J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD
Teresa G. Odle
Jaw wiring
Definition
Jaw wiring, also known as maxillomandibular
fixation, is a surgical procedure where metal pins and
wires are anchored into the jaw bones and surround-
ing tissues to keep the jaw from moving.
Purpose
Sports injuries, automobile accidents, falls, or fist-
fights are a few of the situations where the jaw might
be fractured or broken. In these cases, jaw wiring may
be necessary to keep the bones aligned and stable while
the jaw heals. The presence ofcancer or other diseased
tissues may make removal and reconstruction of the
jaw necessary. Wiring the jaws shut has been used in
the past as a weight loss aid in cases of extremeobesity
where other treatments had failed, although this pro-
cedure is rarely used for that purpose today.
Precautions
Traumatic injuries to the face can cause damage to
facial nerves and salivary glands and ducts. These
injuries can also leavescars that may require addi-
tional surgery to correct.
Description
Jaw wiring surgery can be performed by an oral or
maxillofacial surgeon (a specially trained dentist), or
by an otolaryngologist (a doctor specializing in sur-
geries of the head and neck). The procedure may be
done in a medical or dental office if the office is staffed
and equipped to handle this type of surgery. More
often, this surgery is performed in a hospital or med-
ical center surgical area. If jaw wiring is required due
to an injury, the surgeon may set the fracture immedi-
ately before swelling sets in. It is also possible to wait
(up to several weeks) until the swelling goes down and
some of the soft tissue injuries have healed, prior to
wiring the jaw fracture.
The surgeon realigns the fractured bones. Every
effort is made to restore the shape and appearance of
the original jaw line. If any teeth were damaged, repair
or replacement may be done at the same time. Small
incisions may be made through the skin and surround-
ing tissue so the pins and wires can be set into the
jawbone to hold the fracture together. To prevent the
lower jaw from moving during healing, pins and wires
may be inserted into the top jaw, as well. The upper
and lower jaws are then wired together in order to
stabilize the fracture.
As with other types of bonefractures, the jaw may
take several weeks to heal. Another type of jawimmo-
bilization that has been developed more recently, rigid
fixation uses small metal plates and screws rather than
pins and wires to secure the jaw bones. The main
benefit of this technique is that the jaws do not have
to be wired shut, allowing the patient to return to a
more normal lifestyle sooner.
Jaw wiring
Preparation
X rays of the fractured area may be taken prior to
surgery. Depending on the extent of the facial injury or
condition to be corrected, the patient may receive a
sedative for relaxation, a local anesthetic drug to
numb the area, and/or an anesthetic agent to induce
unconsciousness prior to the surgery.
Aftercare
A patient whose jaw has been wired will not be
able to eat solid foods for several weeks. In order for
the bone and surrounding tissues to heal, it is impor-
tant to maintain adequatenutrition. A liquid diet that
can be consumed through a straw, will be required.
Soft, precooked foods can be liquefied in a blender,
however, it may be difficult for the patient to consume
adequate calories, protein,vitamins, andminerals with
this type of diet. Liquid diet formulas may be a good
alternative. The patient will also have to be taught how
to care for the mouth, teeth, and injured area while the
wires are in place.
Risks
It is possible that scarring may occur due to the
need to make small incisions in the skin in order to
insert the wires. With any surgical procedure, there are
risks associated with the anesthetic drugs used and the
possibility of infection. If there is a risk that the patient
may vomit, the jaw wiring may pose achoking hazard.
It may be recommended that wire cutters be kept
available in case the wires need to be cut in an emer-
gency situation.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Association of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeons.
9700 West Bryn Mawr Avenue; Rosemont, IL
60018-5701; (847) 678-6200.
American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave., Chicago,
IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. <http://www.ada.org> .
OTHER
‘‘Know theScoreonFacial SportsInjuries’’The Virtual Hospital
Page.University of Iowa. <http://www.vh.org> .
‘‘Topic: Maxillofacial Trauma.’’Connecticut Maxillofacial
Surgeons Page.<http://www.cmsllc.com/toptrm.html> .
Altha Roberts Edgren
JC virus infection see Progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy
Jejunostomy see Enterostomy
Jet lag
Definition
Jet lag is a condition marked byfatigue, insom-
nia, and irritability that is caused by air travel
through changing time zones. It is commonplace: a
2002 study of internationalbusiness travelers (IBTs)
found that jet lag was one of the most common
health problems reported, affecting as many as
74% of IBTs.
Description
Living organisms are accustomed to periods of
night and day alternating at set intervals. Most of the
human body’s regulating hormones follow this cycle,
known as circadian rhythm. The word circadian
comes from the Latin, circa, meaning about, and
dies, meaning day. These cycles are not exactly 24
hours long, hence the ‘‘circa.’’ Each chemical has its
own cycle of highs and lows, interacting with and
influencing the other cycles. Body temperature, sleepi-
ness, thyroid function, growth hormone, metabolic
processes, adrenal hormones, and the sleep hormone
melatonin all cycle with daylight. There is a direct
connection between the retina (where light hits the
back of the eye) and the part of the brain that controls
all these hormones. Artificial light has some effect, but
sunlight has much more.
When people are without clocks in a compartment
that is completely closed to sunlight, most of them fall
into a circadian cycle of about 25 hours. Normally, all
the regulating chemicals follow one another in order
like threads in a weaving pattern. Every morning
the sunlight resets the cycle, stimulating the leading
KEY TERMS
Oral and maxillofacial surgeon— A dentist who is
trained to perform surgery to correct injuries,
defects, or conditions of the mouth, teeth, jaws,
and face.
Otolaryngologist— A doctor who is trained to treat
injuries, defects, or conditions of the head and
neck.
2090 Jet lag
chemicals and thus compensating for the difference
between the 24-hour day and the 25-hour innate
rhythm.
When traveling through a number of time zones,
most people reset their rhythms within a few days,
demonstrating the adaptability of the human species.
Some people, however, have upset rhythms that last
indefinitely.
Causes and symptoms
Traveling through a few time zones at a time is not
as disruptive to circadian rhythms as traveling around
the world can be. The foremost symptom of jet lag is
altered sleep pattern—sleepiness during the day, and
insomnia during the night. Jet lag may also include
indigestion and trouble concentrating. Individuals
afflicted by jet lag will alternate in and out of a normal
day-night cycle.
Treatment
Current treatments
In cases of short-term insomnia triggered by jet
lag, a physician may recommend sleeping pills or
prescription medication. Such medication should
only be taken under the guidance of a health care
professional.
Investigational treatments
In 2002, a team from Flanders University
invented new jet lag sunglasses equipped with a vision
device that used light to stimulate travelers brains.
They believed that wearing the glasses before and
during flights could help the human clock adjust
more easily to changing time zones. The researchers
were looking for a commercial partner to help them
further study the glasses and make them widely avail-
able. The effectiveness of glasses or other head-
mounted light devices is still uncertain, however. A
team of researchers at Columbia University reported
in the fall of 2002 that the use of a head-mounted light
visor yielded only modest improvement in the test
subjects’ symptoms of jet lag.
A newer medication that is considered investiga-
tional is a melatonin agonist presently known as LY
156735. An agonist is a drug that stimulates activity at
cell receptors that are normally stimulated by such
naturally occurring substances as melatonin. LY
156735 was found to speed up the readaptation time
of volunteer subjects following a simulated 9-hour
time shift.
Another new area of research involves the genes
that encode the proteins governing circadian rhythms.
It is known as of late 2002 that differences among
individuals in adaptability to time zone changes are
to some extent genetically determined. Targeting the
genes that affect this adaptability may yield new treat-
ments for jet lag and other disorders of circadian
rhythm.
Alternative treatment
Exposure to bright morning sunlight cures jet lag
after a few days in most people. A few will have
prolonged sleep phase difficulties. For these, there is
a curious treatment that has achieved success. By for-
cing one’s self into a 27 hour day, complete with the
appropriate stimulation from bright light, all the
errant chemical cycles will be able to catch up during
one week.
When selecting an international flight, individuals
should try to arrange an early evening arrival in their
destination city. When an individual is traveling to a
destination in the east, he or she can try going to bed
and waking up a few hours earlier several days before
their flight. If travel is to the west, going to bed and
waking up later than usual can help the body start to
adjust to the upcoming time change. More specific
recommendations are available as of 2002, tailored
to whether the person is traveling through six time
zones, 7–9 zones, or 10 or more.
The following precautions taken during an inter-
national flight can help to limit or prevent jet lag:
/C15Stay hydrated. Drink plenty of water and juices
to prevent dehydration. Beverages and foods with
caffeine should be avoided because of their stimulant
properties. Alcohol should also be avoided.
/C15Stretch and walk. As much movement as possible
during a flight helps circulation, which moves nutri-
ents and waste through the body and aids in
elimination.
/C15Stay on time. Set watches and clocks ahead to the
time in the destination city to start adjusting to the
change.
/C15Sleep smart. Draw the shade and sleep during the eve-
ning hours in the destination city, even if it is still day-
light outside of the airplane. Earplugs and sleep masks
may be helpful in blocking noise and light. Many
airlines provide these items on international flights.
/C15Dress comfortably. Wear or bring comfortable
clothes and slippers that will make sleeping during
the flight easier.
Jet lag
Once arriving in their destination city, individuals
should spend as much time outdoors in the sunlight as
possible during the day to reset their internal clock and
lessen the symptoms of jet lag. Bedtime should be
postponed until at least 10 P.M., with no daytime
naps. If a daytime nap is absolutely necessary, it
should be limited to no more than two hours.
To promote a restful sleeping environment in a
hotel setting, individuals should request that the hotel
desk hold all phone calls. Because sleeping in too late
can also prolong jet lag, an early wake up call should
be requested if an alarm clock is not available. If the
hotel room is noisy, a portable white noise machine
can help to block outside traffic and hallway noises.
A room air conditioner or fan can serve the same
purpose. The temperature in the room should also be
adjusted for sleeping comfort.
All antioxidants help to decrease the effects of jet
lag. Extra doses ofvitamins A, C, and E, as well as zinc
and selenium, two days before and two days after a
flight help to alleviate jet lag. Melatonin, a hormone
which helps to regulate circadian rhythms, can also
help to combat jet lag. Melatonin is available as an
over-the-counter supplement in most health food
stores and pharmacies, but no more than 3 mg should
be used in a 24-hour period.
If weather prevents an individual from spending
time in the sunlight, light therapy may be beneficial in
decreasing jet lag symptoms. Light therapy, orphoto-
therapy, uses a device called a light box, which con-
tains a set of fluorescent or incandescent lights in front
of a reflector. Typically, the patient sits for 30 minutes
next to a 10,000-lux box (which is about 50 times as
bright as an ordinary indoor light). Light therapy is
safe for most people, but those with eye diseases
should consult a healthcare professional before under-
going the treatment.
Prognosis
Jet lag usually lasts 24–48 hours after travel has
taken place. In that short time period, the body adjusts
to the time change, and with enough rest and daytime
exposure to sunlight, it returns to normal circadian
rhythm.
Prevention
Eating a high protein diet that is low in calories
before intended travel may help reduce the effects of
jet lag.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Boulos, Z., M. M. Macchi, M. P. Sturchler, et al. ‘‘Light
Visor Treatment for Jet Lag After Westward Travel
Across Six Time Zones.’’Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine73 (October 2002): 953–963.
‘‘Jet Lag Sunglasses Help Body Clock Tick.’’Optician
August 2, 2002: 1.
Monson, Nancy. ‘‘What Really Works for Jet Lag.’’Shape
August 2002: 78.
Nickelsen, T., A. Samel, M. Vejvoda, et al. ‘‘Chronobiotic
Effects of the Melatonin Agonist LY 156735 Following
aSimulated9h Time Shift:Resultsofa Placebo-Controlled
Trial.’’Chronobiology International19 (September 2002):
915–936.
Parry, B. L. ‘‘Jet Lag: Minimizing Its Effects with Critically
Timed Bright Light and Melatonin Administration.’’
Journal of Molecular Microbiology and Biotechnology4
(September 2002): 463–466.
Rogers, H. L., and S. M. Reilly. ‘‘A Survey of the Health
Experiences of International Business Travelers. Part
One—Physiological Aspects.’’Journal of the American
Association of Occupational Health Nurses50 (October
2002): 449–459.
Wisor, J. P. ‘‘Disorders of the Circadian Clock: Etiology and
Possible Therapeutic Targets.’’Current Drug Targets:
Cns and Neurological Disorders1 (December 2002):
555–566.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Sleep Disorders Association. 1610 14th Street
NW, Suite 300. Rochester, MN 55901. (507) 287–6006.
National Sleep Foundation. 1367 Connecticut Avenue NW,
Suite 200. Washington, DC 20036. (202) 785–2300.
Paula Anne Ford-Martin
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
KEY TERMS
Agonist— A medication that has an affinity for and
stimulates the activity of cell receptors that are
normally stimulated by naturally occurring sub-
stances, including melatonin.
Circadian— Pertaining to biological rhythms
occurring at approximately 24-hour intervals. Jet
lag is caused by a disruption of the human body’s
circadian clock.
Hormone— A chemical made in one part of the
body that has an effect on another part.
Melatonin— A hormone that helps to regulate cir-
cadian rhythms.
2092 Jet lag
Jock itch
Definition
Also known asTinea cruris, jock itch is a growth
of fungus in the warm, moist area of the groin.
Description
Although there are many causes of jock itch,
this term has become synonymous withtinea cruris,
a common fungal infection that affects the groin
and inner thighs of men and woman.Tinea is the
name of the fungus; cruris comes from the Latin
w o r df o rl e g .J o c ki t c hc a nd e v e l o pw h e nt i g h t
garments trap moisture and heat. This creates an
environment in which fungi multiply and flourish.
Athletes often get jock itch but non-athletic men
who sweat a lot can also get it. Jock itch occurs
more commonly in men, but can affect women as
well. The jock itch fungus may cause a rash on the
upper and inner thighs, the armpits, and the area
just underneath the breasts. Many people withtinea
cruris also have athlete’s foot . Athlete’s foot is
called tinea pedis.
Causes & symptoms
T h er a s ho fj o c ki t c hs t a r t si nt h eg r o i nf o l d
usually on both sides. If the rash advances, it usually
advances down the inner thigh. The advancing edge is
redder and more raised than areas that have been
infected longer. The advancing edge is usually scaly
and very easily distinguished or well demarcated. The
skin within the border turns a reddish-brown and
loses much of its scale. Jock itch can spread to the
pubic and genital regions and sometimes to the
buttocks.
Jock itch caused byT. rubrumdoes not involve the
scrotum or penis. If those areas are involved, the most
likely agent isCandida albicans, the same type of yeast
that causes vaginal yeast infections.
Diagnosis
Often a case of jock itch can be identified based on
the characteristic description previously described. If
assessed by a conventional doctor, the area of affected
skin may be scraped onto a glass slide for definitive
diagnosis under the microscope. In order to determine
the exact type of fungus present, a small piece of
affected skin maybe sent off to the lab for further
study.
Treatment
Typical conventional treatment for jock itch
involves the use of an anti-fungal cream, spray, or
powder twice a day for about two weeks. Three com-
monly used, over-the-counter anti-fungals aremicona-
zole (Micatin), clotrimazole (Lotrimin) andtolnaftate
(Tinactin). While the tendency to discontinue treatment
once itching disappears is common, it is important to
use the anti-fungal for a full two-week course in order to
prevent recurrence of the infection.
Alternative treatment
Topical treatments include poultices of pepper-
mint, oregano, or lavender. Tea tree oil, diluted with
a carrier oil of almond oil, can be applied to the rash
several times per day. Cedarwood and jasmine oils can
relieve itching when applied in the same manner.
Grapefruit seed extract can be taken as a strong solu-
tion of 15 drops in 1 oz of water.
Another alternative remedy for jock itch is to
wash the groin area with the diluted juice of a freshly
squeezed lemon, which can help dry up the rash.
A hair dryer on the cool setting can also be used on
the area after showering to dry it thoroughly. A warm
bath relieves itching in many patients. The affected
area should kept clean and dry, and loose-fitting, cot-
ton underwear is recommended.
Prognosis
Treatment for jock itch is quick and usually effec-
tive, but the condition often comes back. With treat-
ment, jock itch improves in two or three days and is
completely gone in three or four weeks. The following
people should be especially vigilant to prevent the
problem from returning:
/C15Athletes
/C15People with fungal infections that affect other parts
of the body (such as athlete’s foot)
KEY TERMS
Fungus— A single-celled or multi-celled organism
without chlorophyll that reproduces by spores and
lives by absorbing nutrients from organic matter.
Scrotum— The external pouch of skin and muscle
containing the testes (testicles).
Vaginal yeast infection— An overgrowth of fungus
in the vaginal area.
Jock itch
/C15People who wear tight clothing
/C15People with damaged or altered immune systems,
including people with HIV or AIDS
Prevention
The best prevention of jock itch is cleanliness and
sanitation. This includes keeping the groin area dry,
wearing loose-fitting rather than tight clothing, wear
boxer shorts rather than briefs, change sweat-covered
clothes as soon as possible, showering immediately
after working out or playing a sport and then applying
talc, and washing workout clothes or sports uniforms
after each use.
Resources
BOOKS
Icon Health Publications.Jock Itch—A Medical Dictionary,
Bibliography, and Annotated Research Guide to Internet
References San Diego: Icon Health Publications, 2003.
PERIODICALS
Grin, Caron. ‘‘Tinea: Diagnostic Clues, Treatment Keys.’’
Consultant (February 2004): 214-216.
‘‘Jock Itch.’’Clinical Reference Systems(January 1,
2004): 1859.
Schmitt, B. D. ‘‘Jock Itch for Teenagers.’’Clinical Reference
Systems (January 1, 2004): 1858.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Dermatology. 1350 I St. NW, Suite
870, Washington, DC 20005. (202) 842-3555. <http://
www.aad.org> .
OTHER
August 5, 2003. National Institutes of Health Medical
Encyclopedia Jock Itch<http://www.nlm.nih.gov/
medlineplus/print/ency/article/ooo876.htm> .
(Accessed March 30, 2005).
Ken R. Wells,
Jock itch see Ringworm
Joint aspiration see Joint fluid analysis
Joint biopsy
Definition
A joint or synovial membrane biopsy refers to a
procedure where a sample of the joint lining or syno-
vial membrane is taken.
Purpose
A joint biopsy is performed to determine why a
joint is painful or swollen. It is usually reserved for
more difficult cases where the diagnosis is not clear.
The test can be used to diagnose bacterial or fungal
infections, an abnormal buildup of iron,cancer,o r
other diseases.
Precautions
The procedure must be done under very sterile
conditions to reduce the risk of infection.
Description
The test is performed either in the doctor’s office,
clinic, or hospital by a surgeon. There are many dif-
ferent ways to perform this biopsy: through an inci-
sion in the joint; with a scope inserted in the joint; or,
more typically, by the insertion of a sharp instrument
through the skin. The procedure can be taken from
any joint, but the most common joint requiring biopsy
is the knee. A sharp instrument (trocar) is pushed into
the joint space. A needle with an attached syringe is
inserted into the joint to withdraw fluid for laboratory
analysis. The surgeon may instill numbing medicine
into the joint and along the needle track before the
needle is withdrawn. The trocar and then the biopsy
needle is inserted and specimens taken. After the speci-
men is taken, both the trocar and the biopsy needle are
removed, a bandage is placed over the joint, and the
samples are sent to pathology for analysis.
Preparation
Blood tests will be done to check that blood clots
properly. A mild sedative may be given before the
procedure. With the patient lying down, the skin
over the joint is disinfected and a local anesthetic is
injected into the skin and tissue just below the skin.
KEY TERMS
Joint— The point where two bones meet.
Pathology— The branch of medicine that looks at
abnormal changes in cells and tissues which signal
disease.
Synovial membrane— Membrane lining a joint.
Trocar— A sharp pointed tube through which a
needle can be inserted.
2094 Joint biopsy
Aftercare
The joint will need rest for at least one day.
Normal activity can resume if there is no increased
pain or swelling.
Risks
There is a chance of joint swelling or tenderness.
Rarely, bleeding and infection can occur in the joint,
or the biopsy needle could break off or strike a nerve
or blood vessel. The risk of infection is higher if the
patient has an immune deficiency.
Resources
BOOKS
Schumacher, H. Ralph, Jr. ‘‘Synovial Fluid Analysis and
Synovial Biopsy.’’ InTextbook of Rheumatology, edited
by William N. Kelley, et al. Philadelphia: W. B.
Saunders Co., 1997.
Jeanine Barone, Physiologist
Joint endoscopy see Arthroscopy
Joint fluid analysis
Definition
Joint fluid analysis, also called synovial fluid ana-
lysis, or arthrocentesis, is a procedure used to assess
joint-related abnormalities, such as in the knee or
elbow.
Purpose
The purpose of a joint fluid analysis is to identify
the cause of swelling in the joints, to relievepain and
distention from fluid accumulation in the joint, and to
diagnose certain types of arthritis and inflammatory
joint diseases. The test is also a method to determine
whether an infection, either bacterial or fungal, exists
within the joint.
Precautions
Joint fluid analysis should not be performed on
any patient who is uncooperative, especially if the
patient cannot or will not keep the joint immobile
throughout the procedure. Patients with certain infec-
tions should be excluded from the procedure, particu-
larly those who have a local infection along the
proposed needle track. The joint space should be
accessible. Therefore, a poorly accessible joint space,
such as in hip aspiration in an obese patient, should
not be subject to this procedure.
Description
The test is also called arthrocentesis, joint tap, and
closed joint aspiration. Normal synovial fluid is a clear
or pale-yellow fluid found in small amounts in joints,
bursae (fluid-filled sac found on points of friction, like
joints), and tendon sheaths. The procedure is done by
passing a needle into a joint space and sucking out
(aspirating) synovial fluid for diagnostic analysis.
When the sample is sent to the laboratory, the fluid
is analyzed for color, clarity, quantity, and chemical
composition. It is also examined microscopically to
check for the presence of bacteria and other cells.
The procedure takes about 10 minutes. Prior to
the procedure, any risks that are involved should be
explained to the patient. No intravenous pain medica-
tions or sedatives are required, although the patient
will be given a local anesthetic.
The patient is asked to lie on their back and
remain relaxed. The local anesthetic, typically an
injection of lidocaine, is then administered. The clin-
ician is usually seated next to the patient. Then the
clinician marks exactly where the needle is to enter. As
the needle enters the joint, a ‘‘pop’’ may be felt or
heard. This is normal. Correct placement of the needle
in the joint space is normally painless. At this point,
the clinician slowly drains some of the fluid into the
syringe. The needle is then withdrawn and adhesive
tape is placed over the needle site.
Preparation
Glucose, or sugar, in the joint can be a signal of
arthritis. If the clinician will be doing a glucose test, the
patient will be asked to fast for 6-12 hours preceding
the procedure. If not, there is no special preparation
required for a joint fluid analysis.
Aftercare
Some post-procedural pain may be experienced.
For this reason, the patient should arrange to be dri-
ven home by someone else. Aftercare of the joints will
depend on the results of the analysis.
Risks
While joint fluid analysis is generally a safe pro-
cedure, especially when performed on a large, easily
accessible joint, such as the knee, some risks are
Joint fluid analysis