DISEASE: Pneumonia
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

drugs to control myositis if they are unable to tolerate
corticosteroids or if the corticosteroids are not accom-
plishing the desired degree of treatment. Immunosup-
pressant drugs may also be used in conjunction with
corticosteroids so that lower doses of corticosteroids
can be used. Immunosuppressant drugs include
azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclosporine, tacrolimus,
etanercept, and mycophenolate mofetil.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) appears to
aid in improving muscle strength in many persons
with myositis, particularly those with DM. It may be
less effective in PM, and its role in treating IBM
requires more study, although it has been shown to
help some patients with IBM if they are diagnosed
early. Immunoglobulins are normal proteins in the
blood that attack anything foreign in the body, such
as viruses and bacteria. IVIg is made from donated
blood plasma from people with normal immune sys-
tems. Side effects from the the use of IVIg include
headache and flu-like symptoms.
Topical cream or ointment forms of some of the
medicines, such as prednisone and tacrolimus, can be
used to heal and soothe the rash associated with DM.
Non-steriodal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS)
such asaspirin or ibuprofen can be used for pain relief.
Calcinosis can be treated with prednisone, plaquenil
(also called hydroxychloroquine), intravenous immu-
noglobin (IVIG), cyclosporine, and methotrexate.
After drug treatment results in improvement, the
affected person begins a program of regular stretching
exercises to maintain range of motion in the weakened
arms and legs. Physical therapy may be used to pre-
vent permanent muscle shortening. Whirlpool baths,
heat, and gentle massages may also provide relief.
Adequate rest is necessary, and affected persons
should take frequent breaks throughout the day and
limit their activity.
Patients with throat problems should be evaluated
by a speech therapist who can evaluate the swallowing-
related problems and make recommendations regard-
ing diet changes and safe swallowing techniques.
Before a woman with myositis becomes pregnant,
she should discuss the medicines that she is taking with
her health care provider and evaluate the possible risks
that she and the baby face if she does become preg-
nant. Many of the drugs used in the treatment of
myositis may be harmful to the fetus or to a breast-
fed baby.
It is recommended that a doctor experienced in
the treatment of myositis, assisted by a rheumatolo-
gist, dermatologist, or neurologist, be consulted.
Oftentimes a patient may have to be treated at a
major medical center, where the disease has been
seen and treated before.
Alternative treatment
Various supplements may be used in conjunction
with traditional treatment to offset side effects of con-
ventional drug treatment. The use of these suppple-
ments should be approved by the primary health care
provider.
Immunosuppressant drugs such as methotroxate
and cyclophosphamide increase the risk of infection,
so a healthy well-balanced diet is required.
Methotroxate impairs the body’s ability to absorb
folic acid, so foods high in folic acid, such as leafy
green vegetables, fruits, and folate-fortified breads
and cereals are recommended. The use of folate sup-
plements may also be recommended by the health care
provider. Vitamins C and E can be used to help with
the pain and infections associated with calcinosis.
Corticosteroids may have multiple side effects
when taken for long periods of time at high doses.
Calcium and Vitamin D are recommended to lower
the risk ofosteoporosis, a common side effect of pre-
dnisone use.Hypertension and fluid retention may be
controlled by a diet low in salt. Steroid-induced dia-
betes (hyperglycemia) can be aided by a diet low in
sugar and other simple carbohydrates. Proteinuria, in
which the body breaks down protein faster than nor-
mal, may mean that more protein should be included
in the diet.
Weight gain associated with the use of corticoster-
oids can be managed by the use of the DASH (Dietary
Approach to Stop Hypertension) diet, which is high in
fruits, vegetables, dietary fiber, and low-fat dairy pro-
ducts. Information concerning this diet, developed by
the National Institutes of Health, can be found at
[www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/hbp/dash/].
Weight gain can overtax weakened muscles and
should be avoided if possible.
Prognosis
The progression of PM and DM varies from per-
son to person, but the lifespan of an affected person is
not usually significantly affected. DM responds more
favorably to therapy than PM. Overall, many patients
do improve and have a functional recovery. About
half of the patients recover and can discontinue treat-
ment within 5 years of beginning treatment. In chil-
dren the chances of a cure are better than in adults,
although some children do suffer a relapse. Of the
remaining 50%, about 20% will still have the active
Myositis
disease and will require ongoing treatment, while up to
30% may have some remaining muscle weakness.
However, IBM is disabling, and most patients will
require the use of an assistive device such as a cane,
walker, or wheel chair. The older the patient is when
contracting IBM, the more rapidly the disease
progresses.
Prevention
There is no known way to prevent myositis.
Resources
BOOKS
Kilpatrick, James R. (Compiler).Coping with a Myositis
Disease. Written by Myositis Patients Telling Their
Personal Story of Dealing with this Muscle Disease.
Athens, TX: Kilpatrick Publishing Company, 2000.
Icon Health Publications.Myositis: A Medical Dictionary,
Bibliography, and Annotated Research Guide to Internet
Resources. San Diego, CA: Icon Health Publications,
2004.
Icon Health Publications.The Official Patient’s Sourcebook
on Dermatomyositis: A Revised and Updated Directory
for the Internet Age.San Diego, CA: Icon Health
Publications, 2002.
Icon Health Publications.The Official Patient’s Sourcebook
on Inclusion Body Myositis: A Revised and Updated
Directory for the Internet Age.San Diego, CA: Icon
Health Publications, 2002.
ORGANIZATIONS
Muscular Dystrophy Association - USA, National
Headquarters. 3300 E. Sunrise Drive, Tucson, AZ
85718. Telephone: (800) 572-1717. Web site:
www.mdausa.org/
Myositis Support Group.205 Laurel Road, Athens, TX
75751. Telephone: (903) 675-6825. Fax: (903) 675-6823.
Web site: www.myositissupportgroup.org/
The Myositis Association (TMA).1233 20th St. NW, Suite
402Washington, DC 20036. Telephone: (202) 887-0082;
Fax: (202) 466-8940; Web site: www.myositis.org/
OTHER
Progressive Management.21st Century Complete Medical
Guide to Myositis, including Dermatomyositis and
Polymyositis, Authoritative Government Documents,
Clinical References, and Practical Information for
Patients and Physicians.(CD-ROM). Washington, DC:
Progressive Management, 2004.
Judith Sims
Myositis see Myopathies
Myotonia atrophica see Myotonic dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy
Definition
Myotonic dystrophy is a progressive disease in
which the muscles are weak and are slow to relax
after contraction.
Description
Myotonic dystrophy (DM), also called dystrophia
myotonica, myotonia atrophica, or Steinert’s disease,
is a common form ofmuscular dystrophy.D Mi sa n
inherited disease, affecting males and females approxi-
mately equally. About 30,000 people in the United
States are affected. Symptoms may appear at any
time from infancy to adulthood. DM causes general
weakness, usually beginning in the muscles of the
hands, feet, neck, or face. It slowly progresses to
involve other muscle groups, including the heart.
DM affects a wide variety of other organ systems as
well.
A severe form of DM, congenital myotonic dys-
trophy or Thomsen’s disease, may appear in newborns
of mothers who have DM. Congenital means that the
condition is present from birth. The incidence of con-
genital myotonic dystrophy is thought to be about
1:20,000.
DM occurs in about 1 per 7,000–8,000 people and
has been described in people from all over the world.
Causes and symptoms
The most common type of DM is called DM1 and
is caused by a mutation in a gene called myotonic
KEY TERMS
Coxsackievirus— Enterovirus causing a disease
resembling poliomyelitis but without paralysis
Dysphagia— Medical term for any difficulty, dis-
comfort or pain when swallowing
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy— An autosomal
recessive form of muscular dystrophy that appears
anywhere from late childhood to middle age and is
characterized by progressive muscular weakness
beginning either in the shoulder or pelvic girdle;
the disease usually progresses slowly with cardio-
pulmonary complications in the later stages
2562 Myotonic dystrophy
dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK). The DMPK gene
is located on chromosome 19q. When there is a muta-
tion in this gene, a person develops DM1. The specific
mutation that causes DM1 is called a trinucleotide
repeat expansion.
Some families with symptoms of DM do not have
a mutation in the DMPK gene. As of early 2001,
scientists have found that the DM in many of these
families is caused by a mutation in a gene on chromo-
some 3. These families are said to have DM2.
Congenital myotonic dystrophy has been linked
to a region on chromosome 7 that contains a muscle
chloride channel gene.
Trinucleotide repeats
In the DMPK gene, there is a section of the genetic
code called a CTG repeat. The letters stand for three
nucleotides (complex organic molecules) known as
cytosine, thymine, and guanine, and are repeated a
certain number of times. In people who have DM1,
this sequence of nucleotides is repeated too many
times—more than the normal number of 37 times—
and thus this section of the gene is too big. This
enlarged section of the gene is called a trinucleotide
repeat expansion.
People who have repeat numbers in the normal
range will not develop DM1 and cannot pass it to their
children. Having more than 50 repeats causes DM1.
People who have 38–49 repeats have a premutation
and will not develop DM1, but can pass DM1 onto
their children. Having repeats numbers greater than
1000 causes congenital myotonic dystrophy.
In general, the more repeats in the affected range
that someone has, the earlier the age of onset of symp-
toms and the more severe the symptoms. However,
this is a general rule. It is not possible to look at a
person’s repeat number and predict at what age they
will begin to have symptoms or how their condition
will progress.
Exactly how the trinucleotide repeat expansion
causes myotonia, the inability to relax muscles, is not
yet understood. The disease somehow blocks the flow
of electrical impulses across the muscle cell membrane.
Without proper flow of charged particles, the muscle
cannot return to its relaxed state after it has
contracted.
Since 2001 it has been discovered that DM2 is
caused by a CCTG (cytosine-cytosine-thymine-gua-
nine) expansion on chromosome 3 at locus 3q21, but
as of 2004 it is not known how this repeat affects
muscle cell function.
Anticipation
Sometimes when a person who has repeat num-
bers in the affected or premutation range has children,
the expansion grows larger. This is called anticipation.
A larger expansion can result in an earlier age of onset
in children than in their affected parent. Anticipation
happens more often when a mother passes DM1 onto
her children then when it is passed from the father.
Occasionally repeat sizes stay the same or even get
smaller when they are passed to a person’s children.
Inheritance
DM is inherited through autosomal dominant
inheritance. This means that equal numbers of males
and females are affected. It also means that only one
gene in the pair needs to have the mutation in order for
a person to be affected. Since a person only passes one
copy of each gene onto their children, there is a 50% or
one in two chance that a person who has DM will pass
it onto each of their children. This percentage is not
changed by results of other pregnancies. A person with
a premutation also has a 50%, or one in two, chance of
passing the altered gene on to each of their children.
However, whether or not their children will develop
DM1 depends on whether the trinucleotide repeat
becomes further expanded. A person who has repeat
numbers in the normal range cannot pass DM1 onto
their children.
There is a range in the severity of symptoms in
DM and not everyone will have all of the symptoms
listed here.
Myotonic dystrophy causes weakness and delayed
muscle relaxation called myotonia. Symptoms of DM
include facial weakness and a slack jaw, drooping eye-
lids calledptosis, and muscle wasting in the forearms
and calves. A person with DM has difficulty relaxing
his or her grasp, especially in the cold. DM affects the
heart muscle, causing irregularities in the heartbeat. It
also affects the muscles of the digestive system, causing
constipation and other digestive problems. DM may
cause cataracts, retinal degeneration, low IQ, frontal
balding, skin disorders, atrophy of the testicles, and
diabetes. It can also cause sleep apnea—a condition in
which normal breathing is interrupted during sleep.
DM increases the need for sleep and decreases motiva-
tion. Severe disabilities do not set in until about 20
years after symptoms begin. Most people with myo-
tonic dystrophy maintain the ability to walk, even late
in life.
A severe form of DM, congenital myotonic dys-
trophy, may appear in newborns of mothers who have
DM1. Congenital myotonic dystrophy is marked by
Myotonic dystrophy
severe weakness, poor sucking and swallowing
responses, respiratory difficulty, delayed motor devel-
opment, and mental retardation. Death in infancy is
common in this type.
Some people who have a trinucleotide repeat
expansion in their DMPK gene do not have symptoms
or have very mild symptoms that go unnoticed. It is
not unusual for a woman to be diagnosed with DM
after she has an infant with congenital myotonic
dystrophy.
Predictive testing
It is possible to test someone who is at risk for
developing DM1 before they are showing symptoms
to see whether they inherited an expanded trinucleo-
tide repeat. This is called predictive testing. Predictive
testing cannot determine the age of onset that some-
one will begin to have symptoms, or the course of the
disease.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of DM is not difficult once the disease is
considered. However, the true problem may be
masked because symptoms can begin at any age, can
be mild or severe, and can occur with a wide variety of
associated complaints. Diagnosis of DM begins with a
careful medical history and a thorough physical exam
to determine the distribution of symptoms and to rule
out other causes. A family history of DM or unex-
plained weakness helps to establish the diagnosis.
A definitive diagnosis of DM1 is done bygenetic
testing, usually by taking a small amount of blood.
The DNA in the blood cells is examined and the
number of repeats in the DMPK gene is determined.
Various other tests may be done to help establish the
diagnosis, but only rarely would other testing be
needed. An electromyogram (EMG) is a test is used
to examine the response of the muscles to stimulation.
Characteristic changes are seen in DM that helps dis-
tinguish it from other muscle diseases. Removing a
small piece of muscle tissue for microscopic examina-
tion is called a muscle biopsy. DM is marked by char-
acteristic changes in the structure of muscle cells that
can be seen on a muscle biopsy. An electrocardiogram
could be performed to detect characteristic abnormal-
ities in heart rhythm associated with DM. These symp-
toms often appear later in the course of the disease.
Prenatal testing
Testing a pregnancy to determine whether an
unborn child is affected is possible if genetic testing
in a family has identified a DMPK mutation. This can
be done at 10–12 weeks gestation by a procedure called
chorionic villus sampling(CVS) that involves removing
a tiny piece of the placenta and analyzing DNA from
its cells. It can also be done byamniocentesis after 14
weeks gestation by removing a small amount of the
amniotic fluid surrounding the baby and analyzing the
cells in the fluid. Each of these procedures has a small
risk of miscarriage associated with it and those who
are interested in learning more should check with their
doctor or genetic counselor.
There is also another procedure called preimplan-
tation diagnosis that allows a couple to have a child
that is unaffected with the genetic condition in their
family. This procedure is experimental and not widely
available. Those interested in learning more about this
procedure should check with their doctor or genetic
counselor.
A group of researchers in Houston, Texas,
reported in 2004 that they have successfully developed
a technique for detecting the CCTG expansion that
causes DM2 and estimating the size of the repeat
expansion.
Treatment
Myotonic dystrophy cannot be cured, and no
treatment can delay its progression. As of the early
2000s there is no standardized treatment for these
disorders because the precise reasons for muscle weak-
ness are not yet fully understood. However, many of
the symptoms can be treated. Physical therapy can
help preserve or increase strength and flexibility in
muscles. Ankle and wrist braces can be used to sup-
port weakened limbs. Occupational therapy is used to
develop tools and techniques to compensate for loss of
strength and dexterity. A speech-language pathologist
can provide retraining for weakness in the muscles
controlling speech and swallowing.
Irregularities in the heartbeat may be treated with
medication or a pacemaker. A yearly electrocardio-
gram is usually recommended to monitor the heart-
beat. Diabetes mellitus in DM is treated in the same
way that it is in the general population. A high-fiber
diet can help prevent constipation.Sleep apneamay be
treated with surgical procedures to open the airways
or with nighttime ventilation. Treatment of sleep
apnea may reduce drowsiness. Lens replacement sur-
gery is available when cataracts develop. Pregnant
woman should be followed by an obstetrician familiar
with the particular problems of DM because compli-
cations can occur during pregnancy, labor and
delivery.
2564 Myotonic dystrophy
Wearing a medical bracelet is advisable. Some
emergency medications may have dangerous effects
on the heart rhythm in a person with DM. Adverse
reactions togeneral anesthesiamay also occur.
Prognosis
The course of myotonic dystrophy varies. When
symptoms appear earlier in life, disability tends to
become more severe. Occasionally people with DM
may require a wheelchair later in life. Children with
congenital DM usually require special educational
programs and physical and occupational therapy.
For both types of DM, respiratory infections pose a
danger when weakness becomes severe.
Resources
BOOKS
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD, editors.
‘‘Myotonic Disorders.’’ Section 14, Chapter 184. InThe
Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.Whitehouse
Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 2004.
PERIODICALS
International Myotonic Dystrophy Consortium (IMDC).
‘‘New Nomenclature and DNA Testing Guidelines for
Myotonic Dystrophy Type 1 (DM1).’’Neurology 54
(2000): 1218–1221.
Meola, G., and V. Sansone. ‘‘Treatment in Myotonia and
Periodic Paralysis.’’Revue neurologique (Paris)160,
no. 5, Part 2 (May 2004: S55–S69.
Meola, Giovanni. ‘‘Myotonic Dystrophies.’’Current
Opinion in Neurology13 (2000): 519–525.
Ranum, L. P., and J. W. Day. ‘‘Myotonic dystrophy: RNA
Pathogenesis Comes into Focus.’’American Journal of
Human Genetics74 (May 2004): 793–804.
Sallinen, R., A. Vihola, L. L. Bachinski, et al. ‘‘New
Methods for Molecular Diagnosis and Demonstration
of the (CCTG)n Mutation in Myotonic Dystrophy
Type 2 (DM2).’’Neuromuscular Disorders14 (April
2004): 274–283.
ORGANIZATIONS
Muscular Dystrophy Association. 3300 East Sunrise Dr.,
Tucson, AZ 85718. (520) 529-2000 or (800) 572-1717.
<http://www.mdausa.org> .
OTHER
Gene Clinics. <http://www.geneclinics.org> .
Myotonic Dystrophy Website. <http://www.umd
.necker.fr/myotonic_dystrophy.html> .
NCBI Genes and Disease Web Page. <http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/disease/Myotonic.html> .
Karen M. Krajewski, M.S., C.G.C.
Rebecca J. Frey, Ph.D.
Myringotomy and ear tubes
Definition
Myringotomy is a surgical procedure in which a
small incision is made in the eardrum (the tympanic
membrane), usually in both ears. The word comes
from myringa, modern Latin for drum membrane,
and tom/C22e, Greek for cutting. It is also called myringo-
centesis, tympanotomy, tympanostomy, orparacent-
esis of the tympanic membrane. Fluid in the middle ear
can be sucked out through the incision.
Ear tubes, or tympanostomy tubes, are small tubes,
open at both ends, that are inserted into the incisions in
the eardrums during myringotomy. They come in var-
ious shapes and sizes and are made of plastic, metal, or
both. They are left in place until they fall out by them-
selves or until they are removed by a doctor.
Purpose
Myringotomy with the insertion of ear tubes is an
optional treatment for inflammation of the middle ear
with fluid collection (effusion), also called glue ear, that
KEY TERMS
Electrocardiogram (ECG, EKG)— A test that uses
electrodes attached to the chest with an adhesive
gel to transmit the electrical impulses of the heart
muscle to a recording device.
Electromyography (EMG)— A test that uses electro-
des to record the electrical activity of muscle. The
information gathered is used to diagnose neuro-
muscular disorders.
Muscular dystrophy— A group of inherited dis-
eases characterized by progressive wasting of the
muscles.
Nucleotide— Any of a group of organic molecules
that link together to form the building blocks of
DNA or RNA.
Sleep apnea— Temporary cessation of breathing
while sleeping.
Trinucleotide repeat expansion— A sequence of
three nucleotides that is repeated too many times
in a section of a gene.
Myringotomy and ear tubes
lasts more than three months (chronicotitis mediawith
effusion) and does not respond to drug treatment. It is
the recommended treatment if the condition lasts four
to six months. Effusion is the collection of fluid that
escapes from blood vessels or the lymphatic system. In
this case, the fluid collects in the middle ear.
Initially, acute inflammation of the middle ear with
effusion is treated with one or two courses ofantibiotics.
Antihistamines and decongestants have been used, but
they have not been proven effective unless there is also
hay fever or some other allergic inflammation that
contributes to the problem. Myringotomy with or with-
out the insertion of ear tubes is NOT recommended for
initial treatment of otherwise healthy children with
middle ear inflammation with effusion.
In about 10% of children, the effusion lasts for
three months or longer, when the disease is considered
chronic. In children with chronic disease, systemic
steroids may help, but the evidence is not clear, and
there are risks.
When medical treatment does not stop the effu-
sion after three months in a child who is one to three
years old, is otherwise healthy, and hashearing lossin
both ears, myringotomy with insertion of ear tubes
becomes an option. If the effusion lasts for four to
six months, myringotomy with insertion of ear tubes is
recommended.
The purpose of myringotomy is to relieve symp-
toms, to restore hearing, to take a sample of the fluid
to examine in the laboratory in order to identify any
microorganisms present, or to insert ear tubes.
Ear tubes can be inserted into the incision during
myringotomy and left there. The eardrum heals around
them, securing them in place. They usually fall out on
their own in 6-12 months or are removed by a doctor.
While they are in place, they keep the incision
from closing, keeping a channel open between the
middle ear and the outer ear. This allows fresh air to
reach the middle ear, allowing fluid to drain out, and
preventing pressure from building up in the middle
ear. The patient’s hearing returns to normal immedi-
ately and the risk of recurrence diminishes.
Parents often report that children talk better, hear
better, are less irritable, sleep better, and behave better
after myringotomy with the insertion of ear tubes.
Description
The procedure is usually done in an ambulatory
surgical unit undergeneral anesthesia, although some
physicians do it in the office withsedation and local
anesthesia, especially in older children. The ear is
washed, a small incision made in the eardrum, the
fluid sucked out, a tube inserted, and the ear packed
with cotton to control bleeding.
There has been an effort to design ear tubes that
are easier to insert or to remove, and to design tubes
that stay in place longer. Therefore, ear tubes come in
various shapes and sizes.
Preparation
The child may not have food or water for four to
six hours before anesthesia. Antibiotics are usually not
needed.
Aftercare
Use of antimicrobial drops is controversial. Water
should be kept out of the ear canal until the eardrum is
intact. A doctor should be notified if the tubes fall out.
Risks
The risks include:
/C15Cutting the outer ear
/C15Formation at the myringotomy site of granular
nodes due to inflammation
/C15Formation of a mass of skin cells and cholesterol in
the middle ear that can grow and damage surround-
ing bone (cholesteatoma)
/C15Permanent perforation of the eardrum.
The risk of persistent discharge from the ear (otor-
rhea) is 13%.
If the procedure is repeated, structural changes in
the eardrum can occur, such as loss of tone (flaccidity),
shrinkage or retraction, or hardening of a spot on the
eardrum (typmanosclerosis). The risk of hardening is
51%; its effects on hearing are not known, but they are
probably insignificant.
It is possible that the incision will not heal prop-
erly, leaving a permanent hole in the eardrum, which
can cause some hearing loss and increases the risk of
infection.
It is also possible that the ear tube will move
inward and get trapped in the middle ear, rather than
move out into the external ear, where it either falls out
on its own or can be retrieved by a doctor. The exact
incidence of tubes moving inward is not known, but it
could increase the risk of further episodes of middle-
ear inflammation, inflammation of the eardrum or the
part of the skull directly behind the ear, formation of a
2566 Myringotomy and ear tubes
mass in the middle ear, or infection due to the presence
of a foreign body.
The surgery may not be a permanent cure. As
many as 30% of children undergoing myringotomy
with insertion of ear tubes need to undergo another
procedure within five years.
The other risks include those associated with seda-
tives or general anesthesia.
An additional element of post-operative care is
the recommendation by many doctors that the child
use ear plugs to keep water out of the ear during
bathing or swimming, to reduce the risk of infection
and discharge.
Resources
BOOKS
Lim, David J., et al., editors.Recent Advances in Otitis Media:
Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium, June
4-8, 1995, Marriott Harbot Beach, Ft. Lauderdale,
Florida. Hamilton, Ontario: B. C. Decker Inc., 1996.
Mary Zoll, PhD
Myxedema see Hypothyroidism
Ear drum
Eustachian tube
Tube
The insertion of ear tubes in the eardrum helps to alleviate chronic middle ear infections.(Illustration by Argosy, Inc.)
KEY TERMS
Acute otitis media— Inflammation of the middle
ear with signs of infection lasting less than three
months.
Chronic otitis media— Inflammation of the middle
ear with signs of infection lasting three months or
longer.
Effusion— The escape of fluid from blood vessels or
the lymphatic system and its collection in a cavity,
in this case, the middle ear.
Middle ear— The cavity or space between the ear-
drum and the inner ear. It includes the eardrum, the
three little bones (hammer, anvil, and stirrup) that
transmit sound to the inner ear, and the eustachian
tube, which connects the inner ear to the nasophar-
ynx (the back of the nose).
Tympanic membrane— The eardrum. A thin disc of
tissue that separates the outer ear from the middle
ear.
Tympanostomy tube— Ear tube. A small tube made
of metal or plastic that is inserted during myringot-
omy to ventilate the middle ear.
Myringotomy and ear tubes
Myxoma
Definition
A myxoma is a rare, usually noncancerous, pri-
mary tumor (a new growth of tissue) of the heart. It is
the most common of all benign heart tumors.
Description
Myxoma is an intracardiac tumor; it is found
inside the heart. Seventy five percent of all myxomas
are found in the left atrium, and almost all other
myxomas are found in the right atrium. It is very
rare for a myxoma to be found in either of the ven-
tricles. The tumor takes one of two general shapes: a
round, firm mass, or an irregular shaped, soft, gelati-
nous mass. They are attached to the endocardium, the
inside lining of the heart. The cells that make up the
tumor are spindle-shaped cells and are embedded in a
matrix rich in mucopolysaccharides (a group of car-
bohydrates). Myxomas may contain calcium, which
shows up on x rays. The tumor gets its blood supply
from capillaries that bring blood from the heart to the
tumor. Thrombi (blood clots) may be attached to the
outside of the myxoma.
There are three major syndromes linked to myx-
omas: embolic events, obstruction of blood flow, and
constitutional syndromes. Embolic events happen
when fragments of the tumor, or the thrombi attached
to the outside of the tumor, are released and enter the
blood stream. Gelatinous myxomas are more likely to
embolize than the more firm form of this tumor.
Myxomas may also obstruct blood flow in the
heart, usually at a heart valve. The mitral valve is the
heart valve most commonly affected. Blood flow
restrictions can lead to pulmonary congestion and
heart valve disease. Embolization can lead to severe
consequences. In cases of left atrial myxoma, 40-50%
of patients experience embolization. Emboli usually
end up in the brain, kidneys, and extremities.
The third syndrome linked to myxomas are called
constitutional syndromes, nonspecific symptoms
caused by the myxoma.
Causes and symptoms
There is no known causative agent for myxoma.
The main symptoms, if any, produced by myxoma are
generic and not specific. These includefever, weight
loss, anemia, elevated white blood cell (WBC) count,
decreased platelet countand Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Most patients with myxoma are between 30-60 years
of age.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made following a suspicion that a
myxoma might be present, and can usually be con-
firmed by echocardiogram
Treatment
Surgery is used to remove the tumor. Myxomas
can regrow if they are not completely removed. The
survival rate for this operation is excellent.
Prognosis
Successful removal of the tumor rids the patient of
this disease. Emboli from a myxoma may survive in
other areas of the body. However, there is no evidence
that myxoma is truly metastatic (able to transfer dis-
ease from one area to another), causing tumors in
other areas of the body.
Resources
OTHER
‘‘Myxoma, Intracardiac.’’OMIM Home Page, Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man.<http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim> .
John T. Lohr, PhD
KEY TERMS
Embolus— A piece of tissue, blood clot, etc. that
travels through the blood system and can lodge in
smaller blood vessels anywhere in the body.
Metastasis— The spread of a cancer or infectious
agent from the site of origin to other areas of the
body.
Raynaud’s phenomenon— Intermittant ischemia
(deficient blood flow) of the fingers or toes, some-
times also affecting the ears and nose.
2568 Myxoma
N
Nail infections see Onychomycosis
Nail-patella syndrome
Definition
Nail-patella syndrome, is a genetic disease of the
connective tissue that produces defects in the finger-
nails, knee caps, and kidneys.
Description
Nail-patella syndrome is also known as Fong
Disease, Hereditary Onycho-Osteodysplasia (H.O.O.D.),
Iliac Horn Disease, and Turner-Kieser syndrome.
Patients who have nail-patella syndrome may show a
variety of physical defects. The hallmark features
of this syndrome are poorly developed fingernails, toe-
nails, and patellae (kneecaps). Other common abnorm-
alities include elbow deformities, abnormally shaped
pelvis bone (hip bone), and kidney (renal) disease.
Less common medical findings include defects of
the upper lip, the roof of the mouth, and unusual
skeletal abnormalities. Skeletal abnormalities may
include poorly developed scapulae (shoulder blades),
sideways bent fingers (clinodactyly), clubfoot, scolio-
sis, and unusual neck bones. There are also other
effects, such as thickening of the basement membrane
in the skin and of the tiny clusters of capillaries
(glomeruli) in the kidney. Scientists have recognized
an association between nail-patella syndrome and
colon cancer. Nail-patella syndrome is associated
with open-angle glaucoma, which, if untreated, may
lead to blindness. Patients may also havecataracts,
drooping eyelids (ptosis), or corneal problems such as
glaucoma.
People with nail-patella syndrome may display
only a few or many of the recognized signs of this
disease. Symptoms vary widely from person to person.
Signs even vary within a single family with multiple
affected members.
The incidence of nail-patella syndrome is approxi-
mately one in 50,000 births. This disorder affects
males and females equally. It is found throughout the
world and occurs in all ethnic groups. The strongest
risk factor for nail-patella syndrome is a family history
of the disease.
Causes and symptoms
Nail-patella syndrome has been recognized as an
inherited disorder for over 100 years. It is caused by
mutations in a gene known as LIM Homeobox
Transcription Factor 1-Beta (LMX1B), located on
the long arm of chromosome 9.
The LMX1B gene codes for a protein that is
important in organizing embryonic limb development.
Mutations in this gene have been detected in many
unrelated people with nail-patella syndrome.
Scientists have also been able to interrupt this gene in
mice to produce defects similar to those seen in human
nail-patella syndrome.
Nail-patella syndrome is inherited in an autoso-
mal dominant manner. This means that possession of
only one copy of the defective gene is enough to cause
disease. When a parent has nail-patella syndrome each
of their children has a 50% chance to inherit the dis-
ease-causing mutation.
A new mutation causing nail-patella syndrome
can also occur, causing disease in a person with no
family history. This is called a sporadic occurrence and
accounts for approximately 20% of cases of nail-
patella syndrome. The children of a person with spora-
dic nail-patella syndrome are also at a 50% risk of
developing signs of the disorder.
Medical signs of nail-patella syndrome vary
widely between patients. Some patients with this
disorder do not display symptoms. These patients are
discovered to have the nail-patella syndrome only
when genetic studies trace their family history.
Scientists are now working to learn what causes dif-
ferent people to display such different symptoms of
nail-patella syndrome.
The most obvious sign associated with nail-patella
syndrome is absent, poorly developed, or unusual fin-
gernails. Fingernail abnormalities are found in over
80% of patients with this disorder. Abnormalities may
be found in one or more fingernails. Only rarely are all
fingernails affected. This disease most commonly
affects the fingernails of the thumbs and index fingers.
The pinky fingernail is least likely to be affected.
Fingernails may be small and concave with pitting,
ridges, splits, and/or discoloration. Toenails are less
often affected. The lunulae, or light-colored crescent
moons, at the base of the fingernail bed next to the
cuticle are sometimes triangularly-shaped in people
with nail-patella syndrome.
Kneecap abnormalities are the second most com-
mon sign associated with this disorder. Either or both
kneecaps may be missing or poorly formed. If present,
kneecaps are likely to be dislocated. The knees of
people with nail-patella syndrome may have a square
appearance. Besides the kneecap, other support struc-
tures including bones, ligaments, and tendons may
also be malformed. These support structures stabilize
the knee, therefore patients with some leg malforma-
tions may have difficulty in walking.
The hip bones of approximately 80% of patients
with nail-patella syndrome have unusual bony
projections called posterior iliac horns. These bony
projections, or spurs, are internal and not obvious
unless they are detected on x ray. This unusual pelvic
anatomy is not associated with any other disease.
Kidney diseasei sp r e s e n ti na tl e a s t3 0 %o fp e o p l e
with nail-patella syndrome. Biopsy shows lesions that
resemble those of inflammation of the clusters of capil-
laries in the kidneys (glomerulonephritis), but without
any infection present. Kidney failure is the most dan-
gerous consequence of nail-patella syndrome. It occurs
in about 30% of patients who have kidney involvement.
An early sign of kidney involvement is the presence of
protein or blood in the urine (chronic, benign protei-
nuria and hematuria.) Kidney involvement is progres-
sive, so early diagnosis and treatment of renal disease
is important. Kidney disease has been reported in
children with nail-patella syndrome, but renal involve-
ment more commonly develops during adulthood.
Various skeletal symptoms may occur. Patients
with nail-patella syndrome may not be able to fully
straighten their arms at the elbow. This may create a
webbed appearance at the elbow joint. Patients may
have sideways bent fingers, poorly developed shoulder
blades, clubfoot, hip dislocation, unusual neck bones,
or scoliosis.
Eye problems may be present and vary from
person to person. Nail-patella syndrome is associated
with open angle glaucoma. Open angle glaucoma
is caused by fluid blocked into the front chamber of
the eye. This blocked fluid builds increasing pressure
into the eye. If untreated, this increased pressure
may lead to permanent damage of the optic nerve
and irreversible blindness. Some patients with nail-
patella syndrome have ptosis, or drooping eyelids.
Nail-patella syndrome has also been associated
with abnormalities of the cornea, cataracts, andastig-
matism. Additionally, the irises of the eye may be multi-
colored, possibly displaying a clover-shaped pattern of
color.
Diagnosis
As of early 2001,genetic testing for nail-patella
syndrome is available only through research institu-
tions that are working to further characterize this
disorder. Genetic testing cannot predict which signs
of the disease will develop. Nor can genetic testing
predict the severity of disease symptoms. Improved
genetic testing for nail-patella syndrome is anticipated
in the future.
Diagnosis of this disease is most often made on
visual medical clues such as the characteristic abnorm-
alities of the fingernails and kneecaps. Diagnosis is
confirmed by x-ray images of the affected bones and,
when indicated, kidney biopsy. The bony pelvic spurs
found in 80% of patients with nail-patella syndrome
are not associated with any other disease.
Prenatal diagnosis for nail-patella syndrome by
third-trimester ultrasound was documented in 1998.
Prenatal diagnosis via genetic testing of cells obtained
by chorionic villus sampling was reported the same
year. As of 2001, prenatal genetic testing for nail-
patella syndrome is not yet widely available. There is
controversy surrounding the use of prenatal testing for
such a variable disorder. Prenatal testing cannot pre-
dict the extent of an individual’s disease.
Treatment
Treatment is usually not necessary. Treatment,
when required, depends on each patient’s specific
symptoms. Severe kidney disease is treated with dia-
lysis or a kidney transplant. Patients receiving kidney
2570 Nail-patella syndrome
transplants do not develop nail-patella type renal
complications in their new kidney.
A wheelchair may be required if walking becomes
painful due to bone, tendon, ligament, or muscle
defects. Orthopedic surgerymay be necessary for con-
genital clubfoot deformity. Manipulation or surgery
may be required to correct hip dislocation. Cataracts
are also surgically treated. Medical treatment at early
signs of glaucoma prevents progression of the disease
to blindness.
Genetic counselingis offered to persons who have
the disease. Parents with this disease have a 50% chance
of passing it to each of their children. As of 2001,
current genetic testing technology cannot predict the
severity or scope of an individual’s symptoms.
Because many possible manifestations of nail-
patella syndrome exist, patients are advised to pursue
extra medical care including regular urinalysis and
special eye exams. Children with nail-patella syndrome
should be screened for scoliosis.
Prognosis
Survival among patients with nail-patella syn-
drome is not decreased unless a they exhibit renal
complications. It is estimated that 8% of individuals
with nail-patella syndrome who come to medical
attention eventually die of kidney disease.
Resources
BOOKS
Berkow, R., M. H. Beers, A. J. Fletcher, and R. M. Bogin.
The Merck Manual of Medical Information - Home
Edition. McGraw-Hill, 2004.
OTHER
Gene Clinics.<http://www.geneclinics.org> .
OMIM—Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man.
<http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim> .
John T. Lohr, PhD
Judy C. Hawkins, MS
Nail removal
Definition
Nail removal is a form of treatment that is some-
times necessary following traumatic injuries or recur-
rent infections in the area of the nail. There are
nonsurgical as well as surgical methods of nail removal.
Purpose
Nails are removed only when necessary to allow
the skin beneath the nail (the nail bed) to heal or in
some cases, to remove a nail that has been partially
pulled out in an accident. In the case of toenails, it is
occasionally necessary to remove the nail of the large
toe due to a chronic condition caused by badly fitted
shoes. In general, however, doctors prefer to try other
forms of treatment before removing the nail.
Depending on the cause, nail disorders are usually
treated with oral medications; applying medicated
gels or creams directly to the skin around the nail;
avoiding substances that irritate the nail folds; surgical
lancing of abscesses around the nail; or injectingcorti-
costeroids under the nail fold.
The most common causes of nail disorders include:
/C15Trauma. The nails can be damaged by nail biting,
using the fingernails as tools, and incorrect use of
nail files and manicure scissors as well as by accidents
and sports injuries.
/C15Infections. These include fungal infections under the
nails, bacterial infections of cuts or breaks in the nail
folds, or infections of the nails themselves caused by
Candida albicans. Inflammation of the nail folds is
called paronychia.
/C15Exposure to harsh detergents, industrial chemicals,
hot water, and other irritants. People who work as
dishwashers are especially vulnerable to separation
of the nail itself from the nail bed (onycholysis).
/C15Systemic diseases and disorders. These include
psoriasis, anemia, and certain congenital disorders.
KEY TERMS
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)— A procedure
used for prenatal diagnosis at 10–12 weeks gesta-
tion. Under ultrasound guidance a needle is
inserted either through the mother’s vagina or
abdominal wall and a sample of cells is collected
from around the early embryo. These cells are then
tested for chromosome abnormalities or other
genetic diseases.
Glomeruli— Tiny clusters of capillaries in the kidney.
Hematuria— The presence of blood in the urine.
Patella— The kneecap.
Proteinuria— Excess protein in the urine.
Nail removal
/C15Allergic reactions to nail polish, polish remover, or
the glue used to attach false nails.
Precautions
In the case of infections, it is necessary to distin-
guish between fungal, bacterial, and candidal infections
before removing the nail. Cultures can usually be
obtained from pus or tissue fluid from the affected nail.
Description
Surgical nail removal
If necessary, the surgeon can remove the nail at its
base with an instrument called a needlepoint scalpel.
In a few cases, the nail may need to be pulled out
(avulsed) from its matrix.
Nonsurgical nail removal
Nails can be removed by applying a mixture of
40% urea, 20% anhydrous lanolin, 5% white wax,
25% white petroleum jelly, and silica gel type H.
Preparation
For nonsurgical nail removal, the nail fold is
treated with tincture of benzoin and covered with
adhesive tape. The nail itself is thickly coated with
the urea mixture, followed by a layer of plastic film
and adhesive tape. The mixture is left on the nail for
five to 10 days, after which the nail itself can be
removed.
Aftercare
Aftercare of surgical removal is similar to the care
of any minor surgical procedure. Aftercare of the urea
paste method includes applying medication for the
specific infection that is being treated.
Nail body
Lunula
Nail root
Hyponychium
Phalanx (bone)
Cuticle
The physiology of the human fingernail. The most common causes of nail disorders include trauma, infections, exposure to
harsh detergents, hot water and other irritants, systemic diseases and disorders, and allergic reactions to nail polish, nail polish
remover, and nail glue. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)
KEY TERMS
Avulse— To pull or tear away forcibly. In some
cases, a surgeon must remove a nail by avulsing it
from its matrix.
Matrix— The tissue at the base of the nail, from
which the nail grows.
Nail bed— The layer of tissue underneath the nail.
Onycholysis— The separation of a nail from its
underlying bed. Onycholysis is a common symp-
tom of candidal infections of the nail or of exposure
to harsh chemicals and detergents.
Paronychia— Inflammation of the folds of skin that
surround a nail.
2572 Nail removal
Risks
Risks from either procedure are minimal.
Normal results
Normal results include the successful removal of
the infected or damaged nail.
Resources
BOOKS
Baden, Howard P. ‘‘Diseases of the Nails.’’ InConn’s
Current Therapy, 1996, edited by Robert E. Rakel.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996.
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Nalidixic acid see Urinary anti-infectives
Narcissistic personality disorder see
Personality disorders
Narcolepsy
Definition
Narcolepsy is a disorder marked by excessive
daytime sleepiness, uncontrollable sleep attacks, and
cataplexy (a sudden loss of muscle tone, usually lasting
up to half an hour).
Description
Narcolepsy is the second-leading cause of exces-
sive daytime sleepiness (after obstructive sleep apnea).
Persistent sleepiness and sleep attacks are the hall-
marks of this condition. The sleepiness has been com-
pared to the feeling of trying to stay awake after not
sleeping for two or three days.
People with narcolepsy fall asleep suddenly—
anywhere, at any time, maybe even in the middle of
a conversation. These sleep attacks can last from a
few seconds to more than an hour. Depending on
where they occur, they may be mildly inconvenient
or even dangerous to the individual. Some people
continue to function outwardly during the sleep
episodes, such as talking or putting things away.
But when they wake up, they have no memory of
the event.
Narcolepsy is related to the deep, dreaming
part of sleep known as rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep. Normally when people fall asleep, they
experience 90 minutes of non-REM sleep, which is
then followed by REM sleep. People with narcolepsy,
however, enter REM sleep immediately. In addition,
REM sleep occurs inappropriately throughout
the day.
There has been debate over the incidence of nar-
colepsy. It is thought to affect between one in every
1,000 to 2,000 Americans. The known prevalence in
other countries varies, from one in 600 in Japan to one
in 500,000 in Israel. Reasons for these differences are
not clear.
Causes and symptoms
In 1999 researchers identified the gene that causes
narcolepsy. The gene allows cells in the hypothalamus
(the part of the brain that regulates sleep behavior) to
receive messages from other cells. When this gene is
abnormal, cells cannot communicate properly, and
abnormal sleeping patterns develop.
The disorder sometimes runs in families, but most
people with narcolepsy have no relatives with the
disorder. Researchers believe that the inheritance of
narcolepsy is similar to that of heart disease. In heart
disease, several genes play a role in being susceptible to
the disorder, but it usually does not develop without
an environmental trigger of some sort.
While the symptoms of narcolepsy usually appear
during the teens or 20s, the disease may not be diag-
nosed for many years. Most often, the first symptom is
an overwhelming feeling of fatigue. After several
months or years, cataplexy and other symptoms
appear.
Cataplexy is the most dramatic symptom of nar-
colepsy. It affects 75% of people with the disorder.
During attacks, the knees buckle and the neck muscles
go slack. In extreme cases, the person may become
paralyzed and fall to the floor. This loss of muscle
tone is temporary, lasting from a few seconds to half
an hour, but frightening. The attacks can occur at any
time but are often triggered by strong emotions, such
as anger, joy, or surprise.
Other symptoms of narcolepsy include:
/C15sleep attacks: short, uncontrollable sleep episodes
throughout the day
/C15sleep paralysis: a frightening inability to move
shortly after awakening or dozing off
/C15auditory or visualhallucinations: intense, sometimes
terrifying experiences at the beginning or end of a
sleep period
Narcolepsy