DISEASE: Scabies
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Alternative treatment
Patients with peroxisomal disorders, and parti-
cularly X-ALD, have been treated with a mixture
of glycerol trioleate-gl ycerol trieucate (4:1 by
volume), prepared from olive and rapeseed oils,
and referred to as Lorenzo’s oil (developed by
parents of a son, Lorenzo, who had X-ALD,
whose story was documented in the 1992 movie,
Lorenzo’s Oil), to decrease the levels of VLCFA.
Other diets that have been tried include dietary
supplementation with plasmalogen precursors to
increase plasmalogen levels and with cholic acid
to normalize bile acids. However, there has been
only limited success demonstrated with the use of
these treatments. More research is needed to deter-
mine the long-term safety and effectiveness of these
treatment strategies.
Prognosis
Peroxisomal disorders range from life-threatening
to cases in which people may function with some
degree of mental and motor retardation. As of 2001,
there was not yet a cure. Enzyme replacement thera-
pies, including enzyme infusion, transplantation, and
gene therapy, may hold promise for future advances in
the treatment of these disorders. Research is being
conducted to increase scientific understanding of
these disorders and to find ways to prevent, treat,
and cure them.
Prevention
Unfortunately not enough is yet known about
these diseases to develop comprehensive strategies
for prevention. Genetic counseling is recommended
for known or suspected carriers. As genes are identi-
fied that result in the disorders,genetic testingis being
developed to identify carriers, who then can manage
their reproduction to avoid the possibility of children
being born with these deficiencies. As the genetic bases
for the disorders are defined, prenatal diagnosis and
identification of carriers will be facilitated. For exam-
ple, for X-ALD, diagnosis can be made from cultured
skin fibroblasts or amniotic fluid cells. This allows
prenatal diagnosis and carrier identification in 90%
of those affected. More recently it has been shown that
biochemical diagnosis can be performed through
chorionic villi biopsy, a procedure performed very
early in the first trimester ofpregnancy.
Animal models of ZS and X-ADL have been
developed and are providing researchers with methods
to define pathogenic mechanisms and to evaluate new
therapies.
Resources
PERIODICALS
Gallo, S., et al. ‘‘Late Onset MLD With Normal Nerve
Conduction Associated With Two Novel Missense
Mutations in the ASA Gene.’’Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery, and PsychiatryApril 2004: 655–658.
Martinez, Manuela. ‘‘The Fundamental and Practice of
Docosahexanoic Acid Therapy in Peroxisomal
Disorders.’’ Current Opinion in Clinical Nutrition and
Metabolic Care3 (2000): 101–108.
Martinez, M., E. Vazquez, M. T. Garcia Silva, J. Manzanares,
J. M. Bertran, F. Castello, and I. Mougan. ‘‘Therapeutic
Effects of Docosahexanoic Acid in Patients with
Generalized Peroxisomal Disorders.’’American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition71 (2000): 376s–385s.
Moser, Hugo W. ‘‘Molecular Genetics of Peroxisomal
Disorders.’’ Frontiers in Bioscience5 (March 1, 2001):
298–306.
KEY TERMS
Autosomal recessive inheritance— Two copies of
an altered gene located on one of the autosomes
must be present for an individual to be affected with
the trait or condition determined by that gene:
/C15an affected individual (homozygote) has two par-
ents who are unaffected but each parent carries
the altered gene (heterozygote).
/C15the risk of two heterozygotes, or carriers, having
an affected child is 25%, one in four, for each child
that they have; similarly, there is a three in four
chance that each child will not be affected.
/C15males and females are at equal risk for being
affected.
/C15two affected individuals usually produce children,
all of whom are affected as well.
Autosome— A chromosome not involved in sex
determination.
Fontanel— One of the membranous intervals
between the uncompleted angles of the parietal
and neighboring bones of a fetal or young skull;
so called because it exhibits a rhythmical pulsation.
Metabolic— Relating to the chemical changes in
living cells.
Organelle— Specialized structure within a cell,
which is separated from the rest of the cell by a
membrane composed of lipids and proteins, where
chemical and metabolic functions take place.
Peroxisomal disorders
Raymond, G. V. ‘‘Peroxisomal Disorders.’’Current Opinion
in Pediatrics11 (December 1999): 572–576.
ORGANIZATIONS
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke,
NIH Neurological Institute. P.O. Box 5801 Bethesda,
MD 20824. (800) 352-9424. <http://www.ninds.nih.-
gov/index.htm> .
National Organization for Rare Disorders.P.O. Box 8923,
New Fairfield, CT 06812- 8923.
OTHER
The Peroxisome Website. <http://www.peroxisome.org> .
Judith Sims
Teresa G. Odle
Persantine-thallium heart scan see Thallium
heart scan
Personality disorders
Definition
Personality disorders are a group of mental distur-
bances defined by the fourth edition, text revision (2000)
of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders (DSM-IV) as ‘‘enduring pattern[s] of inner
experience and behavior’’ that are sufficiently rigid and
deep-seated to bring a person into repeated conflicts
with his or her social and occupational environment.
DSM-IV specifies that these dysfunctional patterns
must be regarded as nonconforming or deviant by the
person’s culture, and cause significant emotionalpain
and/ordifficultiesinrelationshipsand occupationalper-
formance. In addition, the patient usually sees the
disorder as being consistent with his or her self-image
(ego-syntonic) and may blame others for his or her
social, educational, or work-related problems.
Description
To meet the diagnosis of personality disorder,
which is sometimes called character disorder, the
patient’s problematic behaviors must appear in two
or more of the following areas:
/C15perception and interpretation of the self and other
people
/C15intensity and duration of feelings and their appropri-
ateness to situations
/C15relationships with others
/C15ability to control impulses
Personality disorders have their onset in late ado-
lescence or early adulthood. Doctors rarely give a
diagnosis of personality disorder to children on the
grounds that children’s personalities are still in the
process of formation and may change considerably
by the time they are in their late teens. In retrospect,
however, many individuals with personality disorders
could be judged to have shown evidence of the pro-
blems in childhood.
It is difficult to give close estimates of the percen-
tage of the population that has personality disorders.
Patients with certain personality disorders, including
antisocial and borderline disorders, are more likely to
get into trouble with the law or otherwise attract
attention than are patients whose disorders chiefly
affect their capacity for intimacy. On the other hand,
some patients, such as those with narcissistic or obses-
sive-compulsive personality disorders, may be out-
wardly successful because their symptoms are useful
within their particular occupations. It has, however,
been estimated that about 15% of the general popula-
tion of the United States has a personality disorder,
with higher rates in poor or troubled neighborhoods.
The rate of personality disorders among patients in
psychiatric treatment is between 30% and 50%. It is
possible for patients to have a so-called dual diagnosis;
for example, they may have more than one personality
disorder, or a personality disorder together with a
substance-abuse problem.
By contrast,DSM-IV classifies personality disor-
ders into three clusters based on symptom similarities:
/C15Cluster A (paranoid, schizoid, schizotypal): Patients
appear odd or eccentric to others.
/C15Cluster B (antisocial, borderline, histrionic, narcis-
sistic): Patients appear overly emotional, unstable, or
self-dramatizing to others.
/C15Cluster C (avoidant, dependent, obsessive-compul-
sive): Patients appear tense and anxiety-ridden to
others.
The DSM-IV clustering system does not mean
that all patients can be fitted neatly into one of the
three clusters. It is possible for patients to have symp-
toms of more than one personality disorder or to have
symptoms from different clusters.
Some psychiatrists maintain that the DSM-IV
classification is inadequate and should be expanded
to include three additional categories: passive-aggres-
sive personality disorder, characterized by a need to
control or punish others through frustrating them or
sabotaging plans; cyclothymic personality disorder,
characterized by intense mood swings alternating
2862 Personality disorders
between high spirits and moroseness or gloom; and
depressive personality disorder, characterized by a
negative and pessimistic approach to life.
Since the criteria for personality disorders include
friction or conflict between the patient and his or her
social environment, these syndromes are open to rede-
finition as societies change. Successive editions of
DSM have tried to be sensitive to cultural differences,
including changes over time, when defining personal-
ity disorders. One category that had been proposed for
DSM-III-R, self-defeating personality disorder, was
excluded fromDSM-IV on the grounds that its defini-
tion reflected prejudice against women. DSM-IV
recommends that doctors take a patient’s background,
especially recent immigration, into account before
deciding that he or she has a personality disorder.
One criticism that has been made of the general cate-
gory of personality disorder is that it is based on
Western notions of individual uniqueness. Its applic-
ability to people from cultures with different defini-
tions of human personhood is thus open to question.
Furthermore, even within a culture, it can be difficult
to define the limits of ‘‘normalcy.’’
The personality disorders defined byDSM-IV are
as follows:
Paranoid
Patients with paranoid personality disorder are
characterized by suspiciousness and a belief that others
are out to harm or cheat them. They have problems
with intimacy and may join cults or groups with para-
noid belief systems. Some are litigious, bringing law-
suits against those they believe have wronged them.
Although not ordinarily delusional, these patients
may develop psychotic symptoms under severestress.
It is estimated that 0.5–2.5% of the general population
meet the criteria for paranoid personality disorder.
Schizoid
Schizoid patients are perceived by others as
‘‘loners’’ without close family relationships or social
contacts. Indeed, they are aloof and really do prefer to
be alone. They may appear cold to others because they
rarely display strong emotions. They may, however, be
successful in occupations that do not require personal
interaction. About 2% of the general population has
this disorder. It is slightly more common in men than
in women.
Schizotypal
Patients diagnosed as sc hizotypal are often
considered odd or eccentric because they pay little
attention to their clothing and sometimes have
peculiar speech mannerisms. They are socially iso-
lated and uncomfortable in parties or other social
gatherings. In addition, people with schizotypal
personality disorder often have oddities of thought,
including ‘‘magical’’ beliefs or peculiar ideas (for
example, a belief in telepathy or UFOs) that are
outside of their cultural norms. It is thought that
3% of the general population has schizotypal per-
sonality disorder. It is slightly more common in
males. Schizotypal disorder should not be confused
with schizophrenia , although there is some evidence
that the disorders are genetically related.
Antisocial
Patients with antisocial personality disorder are
sometimes referred to as sociopaths or psychopaths.
They are characterized by lying, manipulativeness,
and a selfish disregard for the rights of others; some
may act impulsively. People with antisocial personal-
ity disorder are frequently chemically dependent and
sexually promiscuous. It is estimated that 3% of males
in the general population and 1% of females have
antisocial personality disorder.
Borderline
Patients with borderline personality disorder
(BPD) are highly unstable, with wide mood swings, a
history of intense but stormy relationships, impulsive
behavior, and confusion about career goals, personal
values, or sexual orientation. These often highly con-
flictual ideas may correspond to an even deeper con-
fusion about their sense of self (identity). People with
BPD frequently cut or burn themselves, or threaten or
attempt suicide. Many of these patients have histories
of severe childhoodabuse or neglect. About 2% of the
general population have BPD; 75% of these patients
are female.
Histrionic
Patients diagnosed with this disorder impress
others as overly emotional, overly dramatic, and hun-
gry for attention. They may be flirtatious or seductive
as a way of drawing attention to themselves, yet they
are emotionally shallow. Histrionic patients often live
in a romantic fantasy world and are easily bored with
routine. About 2–3% of the population is thought to
have this disorder. Although historically the disorder
has been more associated with womenin clinical set-
tings, there may be bias toward diagnosing women
with the histrionic personality disorder.
Personality disorders
Narcissistic
Narcissistic patients are characterized by self-
importance, a craving for admiration, and exploitative
attitudes toward others. They have unrealistically
inflated views of their talents and accomplishments,
and may become extremely angry if they are criticized
or outshone by others. Narcissists may be professionally
successful but rarely have long-lasting intimate relation-
ships. Fewer than 1% of the population has this disor-
der; about 75% of those diagnosed with it are male.
Avoidant
Patientswith avoidantpersonalitydisorderare fear-
ful of rejection and shy away from situations or occupa-
tionsthatmightexposetheirsupposedinadequacy.They
may reject opportunities to develop close relationships
because of theirfearsof criticism or humiliation. Patients
with this personality disorder are often diagnosed with
dependent personality disorder as well. Many also fit the
criteria for social phobia. Between 0.5–1.0% of the
population have avoidant personality disorder.
Dependent
Dependent patients are afraid of being on their
own and typically develop submissive or compliant
behaviors in order to avoid displeasing people. They
are afraid to question authority and often ask others
for guidance or direction. Dependent personality dis-
order is diagnosed more often in women, but it has
been suggested that this finding reflects social pres-
sures on women to conform to gender stereotyping or
bias on the part of clinicians.
Obsessive-compulsive
Patients diagnosed with this disorder are preoccu-
pied with keeping order, attaining perfection, and
maintaining mental and interpersonal control. They
may spend a great deal of time adhering to plans,
schedules, or rules from which they will not deviate,
even at the expense of openness, flexibility, and effi-
ciency. These patients are often unable to relax and
may become ‘‘workaholics.’’ They may have problems
in employment as well as in intimate relationships
because they are very stiff and formal, and insist on
doing everything their way. About 1% of the popula-
tion has obsessive-compulsive personality disorder;
the male/female ratio is about 2:1.
Causes and symptoms
Personality disorders are thought to result from a
bad interface, so to speak, between a child’s
temperament and character on one hand and his or
her family environment on the other. Temperament
can be defined as a person’s innate or biologically
shaped basic disposition. Human infants vary in
their sensitivity to light or noise, their level of physical
activity, their adaptability to schedules, and similar
traits. Even such traits asshyness or novelty-seeking
may be at least in part determined by the biology of the
brain and the genes one inherits.
Character is defined as the set of attitudes and
behavior patterns that the individual acquires or learns
over time. It includes such personal qualities as work
and study habits, moral convictions, neatness or clean-
liness, and consideration of others. Since children must
learn to adapt to their specific families, they may
develop personality disorders in the course of struggling
to survive psychologically in disturbed or stressful
families. For example, nervous or high-strung parents
might be unhappy with a baby who is very active and
try to restrain him or her at every opportunity. The
child might then develop an avoidant personality dis-
order as the outcome of coping with constant frustra-
tion and parental disapproval. As another example,
child abuseis believed to play a role in shaping border-
line personality disorder. One reason that some thera-
pists use the term developmental damage instead of
personality disorder is that it takes the presumed source
of the person’s problems into account.
Some patients with personality disorders come
from families that appear to be stable and healthy. It
has been suggested that these patients are biologically
hypersensitive to normal family stress levels. Levels of
the brain chemical (neurotransmitter) dopamine may
influence a person’s level of novelty-seeking, and ser-
otonin levels may influence aggression.
Other factors that have been cited as affecting chil-
dren’s personality development are the mass media and
social or grouphysteria, particularly after the events of
September 11, 2001. Cases of so-called mass sociogenic
illness have been identified, in which a group of children
began to vomit or have other physical symptoms
brought on in response to an imaginary threat. In two
such cases, the children were reacting to the suggestion
that toxic fumes were spreading through their school.
Some authors believe that overly frequent or age-inap-
propriate discussions of terrorist attacks orbioterrorism
maymakechildrenmoresusceptibletosociogenicillness
as well as other distortions of personality.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of personality disorders is complicated
by the fact that affected persons rarely seek help until
2864 Personality disorders
they are in serious trouble or until their families (or the
law) pressure them to get treatment. The reason for
this slowness is that the problematic traits are so dee-
ply entrenched that they seem normal (ego-syntonic)
to the patient. Diagnosis of a personality disorder
depends in part on the patient’s age. Although person-
ality disorders originate during the childhood years,
they are considered adult disorders. Some patients, in
fact, are not diagnosed until late in life because their
symptoms had been modified by the demands of their
job or by marriage. After retirement or the spouse’s
death, however, these patients’ personality disorders
become fully apparent. In general, however, if the
onset of the patient’s problem is in mid- or late-life,
the doctor will rule outsubstance abuseor personality
change caused by medical or neurological problems
before considering the diagnosis of a personality dis-
order. It is unusual for people to develop personality
disorders ‘‘out of the blue’’ in mid-life.
There are no tests that can provide a definitive
diagnosis of personality disorder. Most doctors will
evaluate a patient on the basis of several sources of
information collected over a period of time in order to
determine how long the patient has been having diffi-
culties, how many areas of life are affected, and how
severe the dysfunction is. These sources of information
may include:
Interviews
The doctor may schedule two or three interviews
with the patient, spaced over several weeks or months,
in order to rule out an adjustment disorder caused by
job loss,bereavement, or a similar problem. An office
interview allows the doctor to form an impression of
the patient’s overall personality as well as obtain infor-
mation about his or her occupation and family.
During the interview, the doctor will note the patient’s
appearance, tone of voice, body language, eye contact,
and other important non-verbal signals, as well as the
content of the conversation. In some cases, the doctor
may contact other people (family members, employ-
ers, close friends) who know the patient well in order
to assess the accuracy of the patient’s perception of his
or her difficulties. It is quite common for people with
personality disorders to have distorted views of their
situations or to be unaware of the impact of their
behavior on others.
Psychologic testing
Doctors use psychologic testing to help in the
diagnosis of a personality disorder. Most of these
tests require interpretation by a professional with
specialized training. Doctors usually refer patients to
a clinical psychologist for this type of test.
PERSONALITY INVENTORIES. Personality inven-
tories are tests with true/false or yes/no answers that
can be used to compare the patient’s scores with those
of people with known personality distortions. The
single most commonly used test of this type is the
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, or
MMPI. Another test that is often used is the Millon
Clinical Multiaxial Inventory, or MCMI.
PROJECTIVE TESTS. Projective tests are unstruc-
tured. Unstructured means that instead of giving one-
word answers to questions, the patient is asked to talk at
some length about a picture that the psychologist has
shown him or her, or to supply an ending for the begin-
ning of a story. Projective tests allow the clinician to
assess the patient’s patterns of thinking, fantasies, wor-
ries or anxieties, moral concerns, values, and habits.
Common projective tests include the Rorschach, in
which the patient responds to a set of ten inkblots;
and the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), in which
the patient is shown drawings of people in different
situations and then tells a story about the picture.
Treatment
At one time psychiatrists thought that personality
disorders did not respond very well to treatment. This
opinion was derived from the notion that human per-
sonality is fixed for life once it has been molded in
childhood, and from the belief among people with
personality disorders that their own views and beha-
viors are correct, and that others are the ones at fault.
More recently, however, doctors have recognized that
humans can continue to grow and change throughout
life. Most patients with personality disorders are now
considered to be treatable, although the degree of
improvement may vary. The type of treatment recom-
mended depends on the personality characteristics
associated with the specific disorder.
Hospitalization
Inpatient treatment is rarely required for patients
with personality disorders, with two major exceptions:
borderline patients who are threatening suicide or
suffering from drug or alcohol withdrawal; and
patients with paranoid personality disorder who are
having psychotic symptoms.
Psychotherapy
Psychoanalytic psychotherapy is suggested for
patients who can benefit from insight-oriented
Personality disorders
treatment. These patients typically include those with
dependent, obsessive-compulsive, and avoidant per-
sonality disorders. Doctors usually recommend indi-
vidual psychotherapy for narcissistic and borderline
patients, but often refer these patients to therapists
with specialized training in these disorders.
Psychotherapeutic treatment for personality disorders
may take as long as three to five years.
Insight-oriented approaches are not recom-
mended for patients with paranoid or antisocial per-
sonality disorders. These patients are likely to resent
the therapist and see him or her as trying to control or
dominate them.
Supportive therapy is regarded as the most helpful
form of psychotherapy for patients with schizoid per-
sonality disorder.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy
Cognitive-behavioral approaches are often
recommended for patients with avoidant or dependent
personality disorders. Patients in these groups typi-
cally have mistaken beliefs about their competence or
likableness. These assumptions can be successfully
challenged by cognitive-behavioral methods. More
recently, Aaron Beck and his coworkers have success-
fully extended their approach to cognitive therapy to
all ten personality disorders as defined by DSM-IV.
Group therapy
Group therapyis frequently useful for patients with
schizoid or avoidant personality disorders because it
helps them to break out of their social isolation. It has
also been recommended for patients with histrionic and
antisocial personality disorders. These patients tend to
act out, and pressure from peers in group treatment can
motivate them to change. Because patients with anti-
social personality disorder can destabilize groups that
include people with other disorders, it is usually best if
these people meet exclusively with others who have
APD (in homogeneous groups).
Family therapy
Family therapy may be suggested for patients
whose personality disorders cause serious problems
for members of their families. It is also sometimes
recommended for borderline patients from overin-
volved or possessive families.
Medications
Medications may be prescribed for patients with
specific personality disorders. The type of medication
depends on the disorder. In general, however, patients
with personality disorders are helped only moderately
by medications.
ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS. Antipsychotic drugs, such
as haloperidol (Haldol), may be given to patients with
paranoid personality disorder if they are having brief
psychotic episodes. Patients with borderline or schizo-
typal personality disorder are sometimes given anti-
psychotic drugs in low doses; however, the efficacy of
these drugs in treating personality disorder is less clear
than in schizophrenia.
MOOD STABILIZERS. Carbamazepine (Tegretol) is
a drug that is commonly used to treat seizures, but is
also helpful for borderline patients with rage outbursts
and similar behavioral problems. Lithium and valpro-
ate may also be used as mood stabilizers, especially
among people with borderline personality disorder.
ANTIDEPRESSANTS AND ANTI-ANXIETY MEDICAT-
IONS. Medications in these categories are sometimes
prescribed for patients with schizoid personality dis-
order to help them manageanxiety symptoms while
they are in psychotherapy. Antidepressants are also
commonly used to treat people with borderline per-
sonality disorder.
Treatment with medications is not recommended
for patients with avoidant, histrionic, dependent, or
narcissistic personality disorders. The use of potentially
addictive medications should be avoided in people with
borderline or antisocial personality disorders. However,
someavoidantpatientswhoalsohavesocialphobiamay
benefit from monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhi-
bitors), a particular class of antidepressant.
Prognosis
The prognosis for recovery depends in part on the
specific disorder. Although some patients improve as
they grow older and have positive experiences in life,
personality disorders are generally life-long distur-
bances with periods of worsening (exacerbations)
and periods of improvement (remissions). Others, par-
ticularly schizoid patients, have better prognoses if
they are given appropriate treatment. Beck and his
coworkers estimate that effective cognitive therapy
with patients with personality disorders takes two to
three years on average. Patients with paranoid person-
ality disorder are at some risk for developing delu-
sional disorders or schizophrenia.
The personality disorders with the poorest prog-
noses are the antisocial and the borderline. Borderline
patients are at high risk for developing substance
abuse disorders or bulimia. About 80% of
2866 Personality disorders
hospitalized borderline patients attempt suicide at
some point during treatment, and about 5% succeed
in committing suicide. Borderline patients are also the
most likely to sue their mental health professional for
malpractice.
Prevention
The most effective preventive strategy for person-
ality disorders is early identification and treatment of
children at risk. High-risk groups include abused chil-
dren, children from troubled families, children with
close relatives diagnosed with personality disorders,
children of substance abusers, and children who
grow up in cults or extremist political groups.
Resources
BOOKS
American Psychiatric Association.Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders.4th ed., revised.
Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association,
2000.
Beck, Aaron T., Arthur Freeman, Denise D. Davis, et al.
Cognitive Therapy of Personality Disorders.2nd ed.
New York: The Guilford Press, 2004.
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD., editors.
‘‘Personality Disorders.’’ InThe Merck Manual of
Diagnosis and Therapy.Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck
Research Laboratories, 2004.
PERIODICALS
Battle, C. L., M. T. Shea, D. M. Johnson, et al. ‘‘Childhood
Maltreatment Associated with Adult Personality
Disorders: Findings from the Collaborative
Longitudinal Personality Disorders Study.’’Journal of
Personality Disorders18 (April 2004): 193–211.
Bienenfeld, David, MD. ‘‘Personality Disorders.’’eMedicine
August 18, 2004. <http://www.emedicine.com/med/
topic3472.htm> .
Doyle, C. R., J. Akhtar, R. Mrvos, and E. P. Krenzelok.
‘‘Mass Sociogenic Illness—Real and Imaginary.’’
Veterinary and Human Toxicology46 (April 2004):
93–95.
Gutheil, T. G. ‘‘Suicide, Suicide Litigation, and Borderline
Personality Disorder.’’Journal of Personality Disorders
18 (June 2004): 248–256.
Jordan, A. ‘‘The Role of Media in Children’s Development:
An Ecological Perspective.’’Journal of Developmental
and Behavioral Pediatrics25 (June 2004): 196–206.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry
(AACAP). 3615 Wisconsin Avenue, NW, Washington,
DC 20016-3007. (202) 966-7300. Fax: (202) 966-2891.
<http://www.aacap.org> .
American Psychiatric Association (APA). 1400 K Street,
NW, Washington, DC 20005. <http://
www.psych.org> .
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001
Executive Boulevard, Room 8184, MSC 9663,
Bethesda, MD 20892-9663. (301) 443-4513. <http://
www.nimh.nih.gov> .
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Perthes disease see Osteochondroses
Pertussis see Whooping cough
KEY TERMS
Character— An individual’s set of emotional, cog-
nitive, and behavioral patterns learned and accu-
mulated over time.
Character disorder— Another name for personality
disorder.
Cognitive therapy— A form of psychotherapy that
focuses on changing people’s patterns of emotional
reaction by correcting distorted patterns of thinking
and perception.
Developmental damage— A term that some thera-
pists prefer to personality disorder, on the grounds
that it is more respectful of the patient’s capacity for
growth and change.
Ego-syntonic— Consistent with one’s sense of self,
as opposed to ego-alien or dystonic (foreign to
one’s sense of self). Ego-syntonic traits typify
patients with personality disorders.
Neuroleptic— Another name for older antipsycho-
tic medications, such as haloperidol. The term does
not apply to such newer atypical agents as cloza-
pine (Clozaril).
Personality— The organized pattern of behaviors
and attitudes that makes a human being distinctive.
Personality is formed by the ongoing interaction of
temperament, character, and environment.
Projective tests— Psychological tests that probe
into personality by obtaining open-ended
responses to such materials as pictures or stories.
Projective tests are often used to evaluate patients
with personality disorders.
Rorschach test— A well-known projective test that
requires the patient to describe what he or she sees
in each of 10 inkblots. It is named for the Swiss
psychiatrist who invented it.
Temperament— A person’s natural or genetically
determined disposition.
Personality disorders
Pervasive developmental
disorders
Definition
Pervasive developmental disorders include five
different conditions: Asperger’s syndrome, autistic
disorder, childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD),
pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise speci-
fied (PDDNOS), and Rett’s syndrome. They are
grouped together because of the similarities between
them. The three most common shared problems
involve communication skills, motor skills, and social
skills. Since there are no clear diagnostic boundaries
separating these conditions it is sometimes difficult to
distinguish one from the other for diagnostic
purposes.
Asperger’s syndrome, autistic disorder, and child-
hood disintegrative disorder are four to five times
more common in boys, and Rett’s syndrome has
been diagnosed primarily in girls. All of these disor-
ders are rare.
Description
Asperger’s syndrome
Children afflicted with Asperger’s syndrome exhi-
bit difficulties in social relationships and communica-
tion. They are reluctant to make eye contact, do not
respond to social or emotional contacts, do not initiate
play activities with peers, and do not give or receive
attention or affection. To receive this diagnosis the
individual must demonstrate normal development of
language, thinking and coping skills. Due to an
impaired coordination of muscle movements, they
appear to be clumsy. They usually become deeply
involved in very few interests, which tend to occupy
most of their time and attention.
Autistic disorder
Autistic disorder is frequently evident within the
first year of life, and must be diagnosed before age
three. It is associated with moderatemental retarda-
tion in three out of four cases. These children do not
want to be held, rocked, cuddled or played with. They
are unresponsive to affection, show no interest in peers
or adults and have few interests. Other traits include
avoidance of eye contact, an expressionless face and
the use of gestures to express needs. Their actions are
repetitive, routine and restricted. Rocking, hand and
arm flapping, unusual hand and finger movements,
and attachment to objects rather than pets and people
are common. Speech, play, and other behaviors are
repetitive and without imagination. They tend to be
overactive, aggressive, and self-injurious. They are
often highly sensitive to touch, noise, and smells and
do not like changes in routine.Autism and several
disorders classified with it have increased significantly
in recent years so that they now are diagnosed more
often in children thanspina bifida, cancer,o r Down
syndrome. This may be due partly to improved recog-
nition and diagnosis.
Childhood disintegrative disorder
Childhood disintegrative disorder is also called
Heller’s disease and most often develops between two
and ten years of age. Children with CDD develop
normally until two to three years of age and then
begin to disintegrate rapidly. Signs and symptoms
include deterioration of the ability to use and under-
stand language to the point where they are unable to
carry on a conversation. This is accompanied by loss
of control of the bladder and bowels. Any interest or
ability to play and engage in social activities is lost.
The behaviors are nearly identical with those that are
characteristic of autistic disorder. However, childhood
disintegrative disorder becomes evident later in life
and results in developmental regression, or loss of
previously attained skills, whereas autistic disorder
can be detected as early as the first month of life and
results in a failure to progress.
Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise
specified
The term pervasive developmental disorder not
otherwise specified (PDDNOS) is also referred to as
atypical personality development, atypical PDD, or
atypical autism. Individuals with this disorder share
some of the same signs and symptoms of autism or
other conditions under the category of pervasive
developmental disorders, but do not meet all of the
criteria for diagnosis for any of the four syndromes
included in this group of diseases. Because the children
diagnosed with PDDNOS do not all exhibit the same
combination of characteristics, it is difficult to do
research on this disorder, but the limited evidence
available suggests that patients are seen by medical
professionals later in life than is the case for autistic
children, and they are less likely to have intellectual
deficits.
Rett’s syndrome
Rett’s syndrome was first described in 1966 and is
found almost exclusively in girls. It is a disease in
2868 Pervasive developmental disorders
which cells in the brain experience difficulty in com-
municating with each other. At the same time the
growth of the head falls behind the growth of the
body so that these children are usually mentally
retarded. These conditions are accompanied by defi-
cits in movement (motor) skills and a loss of interest in
social activities.
The course of the illness has been divided into four
stages. In stage one the child develops normally for six
to 18 months. In stage two, development slows down
and stops. Stage three is characterized by a loss of the
speech and motor skills already acquired. Typically
this happens between nine months and three years of
age. Stage four begins with a return to learning that
will continue across the lifespan, but at a very slow
rate. Problems with coordination and walking are
likely to continue and even worsen. Other conditions
that can occur with Rett’s syndrome are convulsions,
constipation, breathing problems, impaired circulation
in the feet and legs, and difficulty chewing or
swallowing.
Causes and symptoms
The causes of these disorders are unknown
although brain structure abnormalities, genetic muta-
tion, and alterations in brain function are believed to
play a role. Still, no single brain abnormality or loca-
tion has been connected to a cause. In 2004, scientists
reported finding the gene mutation (on gene MECP2)
that is present in 80% of people affected with Rett’s
syndrome. In 2004, comprehensive review of research
on twins revealed that interactions between multiple
genes may play a role in the cause of autism. A number
of neurological conditions, such as convulsions, are
commonly found to accompany these disorders.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of pervasive developmental disor-
der is made by medical specialists based on a thorough
examination of the patient, including observing beha-
vior and gathering information from parents and care-
givers. Because many symptoms are common to more
than one condition, distinctions between conditions
must be carefully made. The following summary
describes the distinction between three common
disorders.
PDDNOS:
/C15impairment of two-way social interaction
/C15Repetitive and predictable behavior patterns and
activities
Autism:
/C15all listed for PDDNOS
/C15severe impairment in communication
/C15abnormal social interaction and use of language for
social communication or imaginative play before age
of three
/C15not better accounted for by another psychiatric order
Asperger’s disorder:
/C15all listed for PDDNOS
/C15clinically significant impairment in social, occupa-
tional, or other areas of functioning
/C15no general delay in language
/C15no delay in cognitive development, self-help skills, or
adaptive behavior
/C15not better accounted for by another pervasive devel-
opmental disorder or schizophrenia
Rett’s syndrome:
/C15a period of normal development between 6–18
months
/C15normal head circumference at birth, followed by a
slowing of head growth
/C15retardation
/C15repetitive hand movements
CDD:
/C15normal development for at least two years
/C15loss of skills in at least two of the following areas:
language, social skills, bowel or bladder control,
play, movement skills
/C15abnormal functioning in at least two of the following
areas: social interaction, communication, behavior
patterns
/C15not better accounted for by another PDD or mental
illness
Treatment
Treatment for children with pervasive develop-
mental disorders is limited. Those who can be enrolled
in educational programs will need a highly structured
learning environment, a teacher-student ratio of not
more than 1:2, and a high level of parental involve-
ment that provides consistent care at home.
Psychotherapy and social skills training can prove
helpful to some. There is no specific medication avail-
able for treating the core symptoms of any of these
disorders, though research is promising. Some psy-
chiatric medications may be helpful in controlling
Pervasive developmental disorders