DISEASE: Tuberculosis
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Torsion can be complete, incomplete, or intermittent.
Spontaneous detorsion, or untwisting, can occur,
making diagnosis difficult. Testicular torsion arises
most commonly during adolescence, and is acutely
painful. Scrotal ultrasound is used to distinguish this
condition from inflammatory problems, such as epidi-
dymitis. Testicular torsion is a surgical emergency; it
should be operated on as soon as possible to avoid
permanent damage to the testes.
A scrotal sac with an absent testicle may be the
result of a congenital anomaly (an abnormality pre-
sent at birth), where a testicle fails to develop. More
often, it is due to an undescended testicle. In the fetus,
the testicles normally develop just outside the abdo-
men and descend into the scrotum during the seventh
month. Approximately 3% of full-term baby boys
have undescended testicles. It is important to distin-
guish between an undescended testicle and an absent
testicle, as an undescended testicle has a very high
probability of developingcancer.
Ultrasound can be used to locate and evaluate
masses in the scrotum. Most masses within the testicle
are malignant or cancerous, and most outside the
testicle are benign. Primary cancer of the testicles is
the most common malignancy in men between the ages
of 15-35. Fluid collections and abnormalities of the
blood vessels in the scrotum may appear to the physi-
cian as masses and need evaluation by ultrasound. A
hydrocele, the most common cause of painless scrotal
swelling, is a collection of fluid between two layers of
tissue surrounding the testicle. An abnormal enlarge-
ment of the veins which drain the testicles is called a
varicocele. It can cause discomfort and swelling, which
can be examined by touch (palpated). Varicocele is a
common cause of male infertility.
Precautions
Clear scrotal ultrasound images are difficult to
obtain if a patient is unable to remain still.
Description
The patient lies on his back on an examining table.
The technologist will usually take a history of the
problem, then gently palpate the scrotum. A rolled
towel is placed between the patient’s legs to support
the scrotum. The penis is lifted up onto the abdomen
and covered. A gel that enhances sound transmission
is put directly on the scrotum. The technologist then
gently places a transducer (an electronic imaging
device) against the skin. It is moved over the area
creating images from reflected sound waves, which
appear on a monitor screen. There is no discomfort
from the study itself. However, if the scrotum is very
tender, even the slight pressure involved may be
painful.
Normal results
A normal study would reveal testicles of normal
size and shape, with no masses.
Abnormal results
An abnormal result of an ultrasound of the scro-
tum may reveal an absent or undescended testicle, an
inflammation problem, testicular torsion, a fluid col-
lection, abnormal blood vessels, or a mass.
Resources
BOOKS
Leonhardt, Wayne C. ‘‘Scrotum.’’ InAbdomen and
Superficial Structures, edited by Diane M. Kawamura,
2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1997.
Ellen S. Weber, MSN
Scrub typhus
Definition
Scrub typhus is an infectious disease that is trans-
mitted to humans from field mice and rats through the
bite of mites that live on the animals. The main symp-
toms of the disease arefever, a wound at the site of the
bite, a spotted rash on the trunk, and swelling of the
lymph glands.
Description
Scrub typhus is caused by Rickettsia tsutsuga-
mushi, a tiny parasite about the size of bacteria that
KEY TERMS
Hydrocele— A collection of fluid between two
layers of tissue surrounding the testicle; the most
common cause of painless scrotal swelling.
Varicocele— An abnormal enlargement of the
veins which drain the testicles.
3318 Scrub typhus
belongs to the family Rickettsiaceae. Under the micro-
scope, rickettsiae are either rod-like (bacilli) or sphe-
rical (cocci) in shape. Because they are intracellular
parasites, they can live only within the cells of other
animals.
R. tsutsugamushi lives primarily in mites that
belong to the speciesLeptotrombidium (Trombicula)
akamushi and Leptotrombidium deliense. In Japan,
some cases of scrub typhus have been reportedly trans-
mitted by mites of the speciesLeptotrombidium scutel-
lare and Leptotrombidium pallidum. The mites have
four-stage life cycles: egg, larva, nymph, and adult.
The larva is the only stage that can transmit the disease
to humans and other vertebrates.
The tiny chiggers (mite larvae) attach themselves
to the skin. During the process of obtaining a meal,
they may either acquire the infection from the host or
transmit the rickettsiae to other mammals or humans.
In regions where scrub typhus is a constant threat, a
natural cycle ofR. tsutsugamushitransmission occurs
between mite larvae and small mammals (e.g., field
mice and rats). Humans enter a cycle of rickettsial
infection only accidentally.
Scrub typhus is also known astsutsugamushi dis-
ease. The name tsutsugamushi is derived from two
Japanese words: tsutsuga, meaning something small
and dangerous, and mushi, meaning creature. The
infection is called scrub typhus because it generally
occurs after exposure to areas with secondary (scrub)
vegetation. It has recently been found, however, that
the disease can also be prevalent in such areas as sandy
beaches, mountain deserts, and equatorial rain forests.
Therefore, it has been suggested that the names mite-
borne typhus, or chigger-borne typhus, are more
appropriate. Since the disease is limited to eastern
and southeastern Asia, India, northern Australia and
the adjacent islands, it is also commonly referred to as
tropical typhus.
The seasonal occurrence of scrub typhus varies
with the climate in different countries. It occurs more
frequently during the rainy season. Certain areas such
as forest clearings, riverbanks, and grassy regions pro-
vide optimal conditions for the infected mites to
thrive. These small geographic regions are high-risk
areas for humans and have been called scrub-typhus
islands.
Causes and symptoms
The incubation period of scrub typhus is about 10
to 12 days after the initial bite. The illness begins
rather suddenly with shaking chills, fever, severe
headache, infection of the mucous membrane lining
the eyes (the conjunctiva), and swelling of the lymph
nodes (lymphadenopathy). A wound (lesion) is often
seen at the site of the chigger bite. Bitewounds are
common in whites but rare in Asians.
The initial lesion, which is about 1 cm (0.4 in) in
diameter and flat, eventually becomes elevated and
filled with fluid. After it ruptures, it becomes covered
with a black scab (eschar). The patient’s fever rises
during the first week, generally reaching 40–40.58C
(104–1058F). About the fifth day of fever, a red
spotted rash develops on the trunk, often extending
to the arms and legs. It may either fade away in a few
days or may become spotted and elevated (maculo-
papular) and brightly colored.Cough is present during
the first week of the fever. An infection of the lung
(pneumonitis) may develop during the second week.
In severe cases, the patient’s pulse rate increases
and blood pressure drops. The patient may become
delirious and lose consciousness. Muscular twitching
may develop. Enlargement of the spleen is observed.
Inflammation of the heart muscle (interstitialmyocar-
ditis) is more common in scrub typhus than in other
rickettsial diseases. In untreated patients, high fever
may last for more than two weeks. With specific ther-
apy, however, the fever breaks within 36 hours. The
patient’s recovery is prompt and uneventful.
Diagnosis
Patient history and physical examination
Differentiating scrub typhus from other forms of
typhus as well as from fever, typhoid and meningo-
coccal infections is often difficult during the first sev-
eral days before the initial rash appears. The
geographical location of scrub typhus, the initial sore
caused by the chigger bite, and the occurrence of spe-
cific proteins capable of destroying the organism (anti-
bodies) in the blood, provide helpful clues and are
useful in establishing the diagnosis.
Laboratory tests
Diagnostic procedures involving the actual isola-
tion of rickettsiae from the blood or other body tissues
are usually expensive, time-consuming, and hazardous
to laboratory workers. As a result, several types of
tests known as serological (immunological) tests are
used widely to confirm the clinical diagnosis in the
laboratory.
Specific antibodies develop in the body in
response to an infection. The development of antibo-
dies during the recovery period indicates that an
Scrub typhus
immune response is present. The formation of antibo-
dies is the basic principle of a serological test. Three
different tests are available to diagnose rickettsial
infections. The most widely used is the Weil-Felix
test. This test is based on the fact that some of the
antibodies that are formed in the body during a rick-
ettsial infection can react with certain strains (OX-2
and OX-19) of Proteus bacteria and cause them to
clump (agglutinate). The clumping is easily seen
under the microscope. The Weil-Felix test is easy and
inexpensive to perform, with the result that it is widely
used. The Weil- Felix test, however, is not very speci-
fic. In addition, the clumping is not detectable until
the second week of the illness, which limits the test’s
usefulness in early diagnosis.
A second test known as a complement fixation
(CF) test is based on the principle that if antibodies
are formed in the body in response to the illness, then
the antigen and the antibody will form complexes.
These antigen-antibody complexes have the ability to
inactivate, or fix, a protein that is found in blood
serum (serum complement). The serum complement
fixation can be measured using standardized biochem-
ical tests and confirms the presence of antibodies. A
third test known as the fluorescent antibody test uses
fluorescent tags that are attached to antibodies for
easy detection. This test has been developed using
three strains ofRickettsia tsutsugamushiand has pro-
ven to be the most specific for diagnosis.
Treatment
Scrub typhus is treated with antibiotics.
Chloramphenicol (Chloromycetin, Fenicol) and tetra-
cycline (Achromycin, Tetracyn) are the drugs of
choice. They bring about prompt disappearance of
the fever and dramatic clinical improvement. If the
antibiotic treatment is discontinued too quickly, espe-
cially in patients treated within the first few days of the
fever, relapses may occur. In patients treated in the
second week of illness, the antibiotics may be stopped
one to two days after the fever disappears.
Antibiotics are given intravenously to patients too
sick to take them by mouth. Patients who are severely
ill and whose treatment was delayed may be given
corticosteroids in combination with antibiotics for
three days.
Prognosis
Before the use of antibiotics, the mortality rate for
scrub typhus varied from 1–60%, depending on the
geographic area and the rickettsial strain. Recovery
also took a long time. With modern treatment meth-
ods, however, deaths are rare and the recovery period
is short.
Prevention
General precautions
As of early 2004 there are no effective vaccines for
scrub typhus. In endemic areas, precautions include
wearing protective clothing. Insect repellents contain-
ing dibutyl phthalate, benzyl benzoate, diethyl tolua-
mide, and other substances can be applied to the skin
and clothing to prevent chigger bites. Clearing of
vegetation and chemical treatment of the soil may
help to break up the cycle of transmission from
chiggers to humans to other chiggers.
Prophylactic antibiotic dosage
It has been shown that a single oral dose of chlor-
amphenicol or tetracycline given every 5 days for a
total of 35 days, with 5-day nontreatment intervals,
actually produces active immunity to scrub typhus.
This procedure is recommended under special circum-
stances in certain areas where the disease is endemic.
KEY TERMS
Agglutinin— An antibody that causes particulate
antigens such as bacteria or other cells to clump
together.
Endemic area— A geographical region where a par-
ticular disease is prevalent.
Eschar— A hard crust or scab. In scrub typhus, an
eschar forms over the initial sore from the chigger
bite.
Intracellular parasite— An organism which can
only feed and live within the cell of a different
animal.
Maculopapular rash— A rash characterized by
raised, spotted lesions.
Prophylactic dosage— Giving medications to pre-
vent or protect against diseases.
Rickettsia— A rod-shaped infectious microorgan-
ism that can reproduce only inside a living cell.
Scrub typhus is a rickettsial disease.
Serological tests— Tests of immune function that
are performed using the clear yellow liquid part of
blood.
3320 Scrub typhus
Resources
BOOKS
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD., editors.
‘‘Scrub Typhus.’’ Section 13, Chapter 159 InThe Merck
Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.Whitehouse Station,
NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 2004.
PERIODICALS
Cheng, V. C., A. K. Wu, I. F. Hung, et al. ‘‘Clinical
Deterioration in Community Acquired Infections
Associated with Lymphocyte Upsurge in
Immunocompetent Hosts.’’Scandinavian Journal of
Infectious Diseases36, no. 10 (2004): 743–751.
Ralph, A., M. Raines, P. Whelan, and B. J. Currie. ‘‘Scrub
Typhus in the Northern Territory: Exceeding the
Boundaries of Litchfield National Park.’’
Communicable Diseases Intelligence28 (February
2004): 267–269.
Takahashi, M., H. Misumi, H. Urakami, et al. ‘‘Mite
Vectors (Acari: Trombiculidae) of Scrub Typhus in a
New Endemic Area in Northern Kyoto, Japan.’’
Journal of Medical Entomology41 (January 2004):
107–114.
ORGANIZATIONS
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton
Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404)
639-3311. <http://www.cdc.gov> .
Lata Cherath, PhD
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Scurvy
Definition
Scurvy is a condition caused by a lack of vitamin
C (ascorbic acid) in the diet. Signs of scurvy include
tiredness, muscle weakness, joint and muscle aches,
a rash on the legs, and bleeding gums. In the past,
scurvy was common among sailors and other people
deprived of fresh fruits and vegetables for long periods
of time.
Description
Scurvy is very rare in countries where fresh fruits
and vegetables are readily available and where pro-
cessed foods have vitamin C added. Vitamin C is an
important antioxidant vitamin involved in the devel-
opment of connective tissues, lipid and vitamin meta-
bolism, biosynthesis of neurotransmitters, immune
function, and wound healing. It is found in fruits,
especially citrus fruits like oranges, lemons, and grape-
fruit, and in green leafy vegetables like broccoli
and spinach. In adults, it may take several months of
vitamin C deficiency before symptoms of scurvy
develop.
Currently, the recommended dietary allowance
(RDA) for vitamin C is 50–60 mg/day for adults; 35
mg/day for infants; 40–45 mg/day for children 1–14;
70 mg/day duringpregnancy; and 90–95 mg/day dur-
ing lactation. The body’s need for vitamin C increases
when a person is under stress, smoking, or taking
certain medications.
Causes and symptoms
A lack of vitamin C in the diet is the primary cause
of scurvy. This can occur in people on very restricted
diets, who are under extreme physiological stress (for
example, during an infection or after an injury), and in
chronic alcoholics. Infants can develop scurvy if they
are weaned from breast milk and switched to cow’s
milk without an additional supplement of vitamin C.
Babies of mothers who took extremely high doses of
vitamin C during pregnancy can develop infantile
scurvy. In children, the deficiency can cause painful
swelling of the legs along withfever, diarrhea,a n d
vomiting. In adults, early signs of scurvy include feel-
ing weak, tired, and achy. The appearance of tiny red
blood-blisters to larger purplish blotches on the skin of
the legs is a common symptom. Wound healing may
be delayed and scars that had healed may start to
break down. The gums swell and bleed easily, even-
tually leading to loosened teeth. Muscle and jointpain
may also occur.
Diagnosis
Scurvy is often diagnosed based on the symptoms
present. A dietary history showing little or no fresh
fruits or vegetables are eaten may help to diagnose
vitamin C deficiency. A blood test can also be used
to check the level of ascorbic acid in the body.
Treatment
Adult treatment is usually 300–1,000 mg of ascor-
bic acid per day. Infants should be treated with 50 mg
of ascorbic acid up to four times per day.
Prognosis
Treatment with vitamin C is usually successful, if
the deficiency is recognized early enough. Left
untreated, the condition can causedeath.
Scurvy
Prevention
Eating foods rich in vitamin C every day prevents
scurvy. A supplement containing the RDA of vitamin
C will also prevent a deficiency. Infants who are being
weaned from breast milk to cow’s milk need a supple-
ment containing vitamin C.
Resources
BOOKS
Stein, Jay H., editor. ‘‘Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C) Deficiency.’’
In Internal Medicine.St. Louis: Mosby, 1998.
Altha Roberts Edgren
Seafood poisoning see Fish and shellfish
poisoning
Seasonal affective disorder
Definition
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is a form of
depression most often associated with the lack of day-
light in extreme northern and southern latitudes from
the late fall to the early spring.
Description
Although researchers are not certain what causes
seasonal affective disorder, they suspect that it has
something to do with the hormone melatonin.
Melatonin is thought to play an active role in regulat-
ing the ‘‘internal body clock,’’ which dictates when
humans feel like going to bed at night and getting up
in the morning. Although seasonal affective disorder is
most common when light is low, it may occur in the
spring, and it is then often called reverse SAD.
Causes and symptoms
The body produces more melatonin at night than
during the day, and scientists believe it helps people feel
sleepy at nighttime. There is also more melatonin in the
body during winter, when the days are shorter. Some
researchers believe that excessive melatonin release dur-
ing winter in people with SAD may account for their
feelings of drowsiness or depression. One variation on
this idea is that, during winter, people’s internal clocks
may become out of sync with the light-dark cycle, lead-
ing to a long-term disruption in melatonin release.
Seasonal affective disorder, while not an official
category of mental illness listed by the American
Psychiatric Association, is estimated to affect 10 million
Americans, most of whom are women. Another 25
million Americans may have a mild form of SAD,
sometimes called the ‘‘winter blues’’ or ‘‘winter
blahs.’’ The risk of SAD increases the further from
the equator a person lives.
The symptoms of SAD are similar to those of
other forms of depression. People with SAD may feel
sad, irritable, or tired, and may find themselves sleep-
ing too much. They may also lose interest in normal or
pleasurable activities (including sex), become with-
drawn, crave carbohydrates, and gain weight.
Diagnosis
Doctors usually diagnose seasonal affective disor-
der based on the patient’s description of symptoms,
including the time of year they occur.
An x-ray image of an infant suffering from scurvy.(Photograph
by Lester V. Bergman, Corbis Images. Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Ascorbic acid— Another term for vitamin C, a nutri-
ent found in fresh fruits and vegetables. Good sources
of vitamin C in the diet are citrus fruits like oranges,
lemons, limes, and grapefru its, berries, tomatoes,
green peppers, cabbage, broccoli, and spinach.
Recommended dietary allowance (RDA)— The
daily amount of a vitamin the average person
needs to maintain good health.
3322 Seasonal affective disorder
Treatment
The first-line treatment for seasonal affective
disorder is light therapy, exposing the patient to bright
artificial light to compensate for the gloominess of
winter. Light therapy uses a device called a light box,
which contains a set of fluorescent or incandescent
lights in front of a reflector. Typically, the patient
sits for 30 minutes next to a 10,000-lux box (which is
about 50 times as bright as ordinary indoor light).
Light therapy appears to be safe for most people.
However, it may be harmful for those with eye
diseases. The most common side effects are vision
problems such as eye strain, headaches, irritability,
and insomnia. In addition, hypomania (elevated or
expansive mood, characterized by hyperactivity and
inflated self esteem) may occasionally occur.
Recently, researchers have begun testing whether
people who do not completely respond to light therapy
can benefit from tiny doses of the hormone melatonin
to reset the body’s internal clock. Early results look
promising, but the potential benefits must be con-
firmed in larger studies before this type of treatment
becomes widely accepted.
Like other types ofmood disorders, seasonal affec-
tive disorder may also respond to medication and
psychotherapy. The four different classes of drugs
used for mood disorders are:
/C15heterocyclic antidepressants (HCAs), such as ami-
triptyline (Elavil)
/C15selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
such as fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and
sertraline (Zoloft)
/C15monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO inhibitors),
such as phenelzine sulfate (Nardil) and tranylcypro-
mine sulfate (Parnate)
/C15Lithium salts, such as lithium carbonate (Eskalith),
often used in people with bipolar mood disorders, are
often useful with SAD patients; many SAD patients
also suffer from bipolar disorder (excessive mood
swings; formerly known as manic depression)
A number of psychotherapy approaches are use-
ful as well. Interpersonal psychotherapy helps patients
recognize how their mood disorder and their interper-
sonal relationships interact. Cognitive-behavioral
therapy explores how the patient’s view of the world
may be affecting mood and outlook.
Prognosis
Most patients with seasonal affective disorder
respond to light therapy and/orantidepressant drugs.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street NW,
Washington DC 20005. (888) 357-7924. <http://
www.psych.org> .
National Depressive and Manic Depressive Association
(NDMDA). 730 N. Franklin St., Ste. 501, Chicago, IL
60610. (800) 826-3632. <http://www.ndmda.org> .
National Institute of Mental Health. Mental Health Public
Inquiries, 5600 Fishers Lane, Room 15C-05, Rockville,
MD 20857. (888) 826-9438. <http://
www.nimh.nih.gov> .
Robert Scott Dinsmoor
Seasonal depression see Seasonal affective
disorder
Seatworm infection see Enterobiasis
Seborrheic dermatitis
Definition
Seborrheic dermatitis is a common inflammatory
disease of the skin characterized by scaly lesions
usually on the scalp, hairline, and face.
Description
Seborrheic dermatitis appears as red, inflamed
skin covered by greasy or dry scales that may be
white, yellowish, or gray. It can effect the scalp, eye-
brows, forehead, face, folds around the nose and ears,
the chest, armpits (axilla), and groin. Dandruff and
cradle cap are mild forms of seborrheic dermatitis, and
appear as fine white scales without inflammation.
KEY TERMS
Cognitive behavioral therapy— Psychotherapy
aimed at helping people change their attitudes,
perceptions, and patterns of thinking.
Melatonin— A naturally occurring hormone
involved in regulating the body’s ‘‘internal clock.’’
Serotonin— A chemical messenger in the brain
thought to play a role in regulating mood.
Seborrheic dermatitis
Causes and symptoms
The cause of seborrheic dermatitis is unclear,
though it is has been linked to genetic or environmen-
tal factors.Pityrosporum ovale, a species of yeast nor-
mally found in hair follicles, has been proposed as one
possible causative factor. A high fat diet and alcohol
ingestion are thought to play some role. Other possible
risk factors include:
/C15stress andfatigue
/C15weather extremes (e. g. hot, humid weather or cold,
dry weather)
/C15oily skin
/C15infrequent shampoos
/C15obesity
/C15Parkinson’s disease
/C15AIDS
/C15use of drying lotions that contain alcohol
/C15other skin disorders (for exampleacne, rosacea,o r
psoriasis)
Mild forms of the disorder may be asymptomatic.
Symptoms also disappear and reappear, and vary in
intensity over time. When scaling is present, it may be
accompanied by itching that can lead to secondary
infection.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of seborrheic dermatitis is based on
assessment of symptoms, accompanied by considera-
tion of medical history.
Treatment
Treatment consists of vigorous shampoos with
preparations that assist with softening and removing
the scaly accumulations. For mild cases, a non-
prescription shampoo with selenium sulfide or zinc
pyrithione may be used. For more severe problems,
the doctor may prescribe shampoos containing coal
tar or scalp creams containing cortisone. The antisebor-
rheic shampoo should be left on the scalp for approxi-
mately five minutes before rinsing out. Hydrocortisone
cream may also be ordered for application to the
affected areas on the face and body. Application of
the hydrocortisone should be discontinued when the
condition clears and restarted with recurrence.
Prognosis
This chronic condition may be characterized by
long periods of inactivity. Symptoms in the acute
phase can be controlled with appropriate treatment.
Prevention
The condition cannot be prevented. The severity
and frequency of flare-ups may be minimized with
This young boy is afflicted with seborrheic dermatitis.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
KEY TERMS
Acne— A chronic inflammation of the sebaceous
glands that manifests as blackheads, whiteheads,
and/or pustules on the face or trunk.
Psoriasis— A skin disorder of chronic, itchy scaling
most commonly at sites of repeated minor trauma
(e.g. elbows, knees, and skin folds). It affects up to
2% of the population in Western countries—males
and females equally.
Rosacea— A chronic inflammation of the face, with
associated scattered round nodules and increased
reactivity of the facial capillaries to heat. It is most
common in females, aged 30–50 years.
3324 Seborrheic dermatitis
frequent shampoos, thorough drying of skin folds
after bathing, and wearing of loose, ventilating cloth-
ing. Foods that appear to worsen the condition should
be avoided.
Resources
BOOKS
Monahan, Frances, and Marianne Neighbors.Medical
Surgical Nursing: Foundations for Clinical Practice.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders,1998.
Kathleen D. Wright, RN
Secobarbital see Barbiturates
Secondary erythrocytosis see Secondary
polycythemia
Secondary polycythemia
Definition
Secondary polycythemia is an acquired form of a
rare disorder characterized by an abnormal increase in
the number of mature red cells in the blood.
Secondary polycythemia is also called secondary
erythrocytosis.
Description
Polycythemia means too many red blood cells.
The resulting excess of red cells thickens the blood
and impedes its passage through small blood vessels.
Secondary polycythemia usually affects people
between the ages of 40 and 60.
Types of secondary polycythemia
Known as spurious polycythemia, stress poly-
cythemia, or Gaisbock’s syndrome, relative polycythe-
mia is characterized by normal numbers of red blood
cells but decreased levels of plasma (the fluid part of
the blood). Overweight, middle-aged white men who
smoke, have high blood pressure, and are on diuretic
medicines to remove excess water from their bodies
may develop Gaisbock’s syndrome.
In smoker’s polycythemia, the number of red
blood cells is elevated. Plasma levels are abnormally
low.
Causes and symptoms
Smoking, which impairs red blood cells’ ability to
deliver oxygen to body tissues, can cause secondary
polycythemia. So can the following conditions:
/C15carbon monoxidepoisoning
/C15chronic heart or lung disease
/C15hormonal (endocrine) disorders
/C15exposure to high altitudes
/C15kidney cysts
/C15tumors of the brain, liver, or uterus.
Causes of spurious polycythemia include:
/C15burns
/C15diarrhea
/C15hemoconcentration (higher-than-normal concentra-
tion of cells and solids in the blood, usually due to
becoming dehydrated or takingdiuretics)
/C15stress
Weakness, headaches, andfatigue are usually the
first symptoms of secondary polycythemia. Patients
may feel lightheaded or experienceshortness of breath.
Visual disturbances associated with this disorder
include distorted vision, blind spots, and flashes of
light. The gums and small cuts are likely to bleed,
and the hands and feet may burn. Extensiveitching
often occurs after taking a bath or shower.
Pain in the chest or leg muscles is common. The
face often becomes ruddy, then turns blue afterexer-
cise or other exertion. Confusion and ringing in the
ears (tinnitus) may also occur.
Diagnosis
A very important part of diagnosing secondary
polycythemia is differentiating it from primary poly-
cythemia (also called polycythemia rubra vera or
Vaquez’ disease). Unlike secondary polycythemia, pri-
mary polycythemia cannot be traced to an underlying
condition such as smoking, high altitude, or chronic
lung disease.
Doctors diagnose polycythemia by measuring
oxygen levels in blood drawn from an artery. A patient
whose oxygen level is abnormally low probably has
secondary polycythemia. Erythropoietin may also be
measured. Levels of this hormone, which stimulates
the bone marrow to produce red blood cells, may be
normal or elevated in a patient with secondary poly-
cythemia. Red blood cell mass is also frequently mea-
sured in diagnosing the disorder.
Secondary polycythemia
Imaging studies are sometimes performed to
determine whether the spleen and liver are enlarged
and to detect erythropoietin-producing kidney lesions.
Other diagnostic procedures include chest x rays and
an electrocardiogram (EKG).
Treatment
Secondary polycythemia is treated primarily by
treating the underlying condition causing the disorder.
For example, patients with Gaisbock’s syndrome are
often taken off diuretics and encouraged to lose
weight. Lung disorders, such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), may cause secondary
polycythemia; treating the lung disorder generally
improves the polycythemia.
Some medications may also be taken to treat
symptoms caused by polycythemia. For example,anti-
histamines can alleviate itching, andaspirin can soothe
burning sensations and bone pain.
Until the underlying condition is controlled, doc-
tors use bloodletting (phlebotomy) to reduce the num-
ber of red blood cells in the patient’s body. In most
instances, a pint of blood is drained from the patient as
needed and tolerated, until the hematocrit (the pro-
portion of red cells in the blood) reaches an acceptable
level. Chemotherapy is not used to treat secondary
polycythemia; however, it may be used to treat the
primary form.
Prognosis
Curing or removing the underlying cause of this
disorder generally eliminates the symptoms.
Resources
OTHER
‘‘Secondary Erythrocytosis.’’The Merck Page.June 3, 1998.
<http://www.merck.com> .
Maureen Haggerty
SED rate see Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Sedation
Definition
Sedation is the act of calming by administration of
a sedative. A sedative is a medication that commonly
induces the nervous system to calm.
Purpose
The process of sedation has two primary inten-
tions. First, sedation is recommended to allow patients
the ability to tolerate unpleasant diagnostic or surgical
procedures and to relieve anxiety and discomfort.
Second, sedation for uncooperative patients may
expedite and simplify special procedures that require
little or no movement. Additionally, sedation is often
desirable to diminish fear associated with operative
procedures. Sedation is typically used for common
diagnostic tests that require prolongedimmobilization
such asmagnetic resonance imaging(MRI) and com-
puted axial tomography (CAT) scanning. Some cases
that require sedation may also necessitate the use of
analgesics to decreasepain associated with a procedure
or test.
Precautions
Benzodiazepines (common sedative medication)
have a cumulative effect. This means that if the patient
has not had time to metabolize the previous dose and
ingests more, then the sedative effect may increase.
Because of these additive effects, these medications
taken with other sedatives or alcohol (also a sedative
hypnotic drug) may increase chances for accidental
death. In general, most of the medications that induce
sedation may alter breathing and cardiac stability. In
patients with preexisting lung and/or heart disease,
these medications should be monitored closely or not
prescribed.
Description
The future of anesthetic care involves the simulta-
neous administration of several drugs including IV
medications and inhaled anesthetics. An extensive
survey of death in 100,000 cases published in 1988
revealed that death within seven days was 2.9 times
greater when one or two anesthetic drugs were used
than when using three or more medications. As of
2000 this study is accepted as standard practice and
multiple IV anesthetics is the preferable recommenda-
tion for optimal patient care.
The procedure for sedation is usually explained
to the patient by an attending clinician. An IV access
line is set in place for fluid replacement and injection
of medications. A history is usually taken to assess
risk and choice of medication. The patient typically
signs consent forms and the possible side effects
are explained. The day before the test, the patient
may be required to maintain specified dietary
restriction.
3326 Sedation
For outpatient surgery there are two types of
sedation, conscious and unconscious sedation.
Patients receiving conscious sedation are capable of
rational responses, and they are able to maintain their
airway for ventilation. The hallmark of conscious
sedation is that it does not alter respiratory, cardiac,
or reflex functions (nerve reflexes from the brain) to
the level that requires external support for these vital
functions. Patients receiving conscious sedation are
cooperative, have stable vital signs (pulse, respiratory
rate, and temperature), shorter recovery room conva-
lescence, and lower risk of developing drug-induced
complications. Unconscious sedation is a controlled
state of anesthesia, characterized by partial or com-
plete loss of protective nerve reflexes, including the
ability to independently breathe and respond to
commands. The patient is unable to cooperate, has
labile (fluctuating) vital signs, prolonged recovery
room convalescence, and higher risk of anesthetic
complications.
Preparation
Usually procedures for conscious sedation do not
require preoperative or pre-testing orders. Clinical
situations for unconscious sedation typically involve
eating and drinking protocols starting the day before
the procedure.
The age and physical status of the patient is useful
in determining sensitivity. A detailed past history,
especially prior experiences with sedatives and other
anesthetics is an important part of preparatory assess-
ment. It is important to determine if there were any
untoward side effects associated with a previous med-
ication. Patient positioning is important to prevent
blood pressure changes or nerve damage associated
with abnormal position.
Patients are also monitored for pulse rate, respira-
tion, blood pressure, and temperature. Additionally,
the heart is monitored using electrocardiography
(ECG). Ventilation is assessed using a pulse oximeter.
This machine is clipped with a special probe on one
finger and can measure the levels of oxygen and car-
bon dioxide, which are reliable indicators of respira-
tory status.
Aftercare
The major goal for recovery room monitoring is
assessment of residual drug effects. Recovery room
monitoring primarily focuses on heart stability,
respiratory adequacy and return to previous brain
functioning.
Risks
The original forms of diazepam (Valium, a very
common sedative) caused irritation of veins and phle-
bitis. Newer forms of diazepam (Dizac) are chemically
improved to lower the possibility of vein irritation.
Age and physical health are important risk factors.
Preexisting medical conditions such as high blood
pressure and heart and lung disease may increase the
chance of developing undesirable side effects.
Normal results
Normal or uncomplicated results for sedation
include alleviation of anxiety and discomfort.
Coupled with analgesic, patients are usually pain-
free. The normal progression post procedure or post
operatively would be to return to baseline brain func-
tioning, unassisted breathing, and normal heart rate
and rhythm.
Abnormal results
Patients may have excessivenausea and vomiting
associated with narcotic analgesia (if this is indicated).
Excessive drowsiness can occur secondary to benzo-
diazepine-induced sedation. The patient can also
develop hypoventilation (a decrease in ventilation), air-
way obstruction, high or low blood pressure, abnormal
heart rhythms,nausea, vomiting, and shivering.
Resources
BOOKS
Fleisher, Gary R., et al.Textbook of Pediatric Emergency
Medicine. 4th ed. Lippincott Wlliams &Wilkins, 2000.
Miller, Ronald D., et al, editors.Anesthesia. 5th ed.
Churchill Livingstone, Inc., 2000.
Laith Farid Gulli, M.D.
Bilal Nasser, M.Sc.
Sedative-hypnotic drugs see Anti-insomnia
drugs
Sedimentation rate see Erythrocyte sedi-
mentation rate
KEY TERMS
Baseline— A return to an original state.
Diazepam— One of the most commonly used
sedative-hypnotic medications.
Sedation
Seizure disorder
Definition
A seizure is a sudden disruption of the brain’s
normal electrical activity accompanied by altered con-
sciousness and/or other neurological and behavioral
manifestations. Epilepsy is a condition characterized
by recurrent seizures that may include repetitive mus-
cle jerking called convulsions.
Description
There are more than 20 different seizure disorders.
One in ten Americans will have a seizure at some time,
and at least 200,000 have at least one seizure a month.
Epilepsy affects 1–2% of the population of the
United States. Although epilepsy is as common in
adults over 60 as in children under 10, 25% of all
cases develop before the age of five. One in every two
cases develops before the age of 25. About 125,000
new cases of epilepsy are diagnosed each year, and a
significant number of children and adults that have
not been diagnosed or treated have epilepsy.
Most seizures are benign, but a seizure that lasts a
long time can lead to status epilepticus, a life-threatening
condition characterized by continuous seizures, sus-
tained loss of consciousness, and respiratory distress.
Non-convulsive epilepsy can impair physical coordina-
tion, vision, and other senses. Undiagnosed seizures
can lead to conditions that are more serious and more
difficult to manage.
Types of seizures
Generalized epileptic seizures occur when electri-
cal abnormalities exist throughout the brain. A partial
seizure does not involve the entire brain. A partial
seizure begins in an area called an epileptic focus, but
may spread to other parts of the brain and cause a
generalized seizure. Some people who have epilepsy
have more than one type of seizure.
Motor attacks cause parts of the body to jerk
repeatedly. A motor attack usually lasts less than an
hour and may last only a few minutes. Sensory seizures
begin withnumbness or tingling in one area. The sensa-
tion may move along one side of the body or the back
before subsiding.
Visual seizures, which affect the area of the brain
that controls sight, cause people to see things that are
not there. Auditory seizures affect the part of the brain
that controls hearing and cause the patient to imagine
voices, music, and other sounds. Other types of
seizures can cause confusion, upset stomach, or emo-
tional distress.
GENERALIZED SEIZURES. A generalized tonic-clo-
nic (grand-mal) seizure begins with a loud cry before
the person having the seizure loses consciousness and
falls to the ground. The muscles become rigid for
about 30 seconds during the tonic phase of the seizure
and alternately contract and relax during the clonic
phase, which lasts 30–60 seconds. The skin sometimes
acquires a bluish tint and the person may bite his
tongue, lose bowel or bladder control, or have trouble
breathing.
A grand mal seizure lasts between two and five
minutes, and the person may be confused or have
trouble talking when he regains consciousness (post-
ictal state). He may complain of head or muscle aches,
or weakness in his arms or legs before falling into a
deep sleep.
PRIMARY GENERALIZED SEIZURES. A primary gen-
eralized seizure occurs when electrical discharges
begin in both halves (hemispheres) of the brain at the
same time. Primary generalized seizures are more
likely to be major motor attacks than to be absence
seizures.
ABSENCE SEIZURES. Absence (petit mal) seizures
generally begin at about the age of four and stop by
the time the child becomes an adolescent.
Absence seizures usually begin with a brief loss of
consciousness and last between one and 10 seconds. A
person having a petit mal seizure becomes very quiet
and may blink, stare blankly, roll his eyes, or move his
lips. A petit mal seizure lasts 15-20 seconds. When it
ends, the person who had the seizure resumes whatever
he was doing before the seizure began. He will not
remember the seizure and may not realize that any-
thing unusual has happened. Untreated, petit mal sei-
zures can recur as many as 100 times a day and may
progress to grand mal seizures.
MYOCLONIC SEIZURES. Myoclonic seizures are
characterized by brief, involuntary spasms of the ton-
gue or muscles of the face, arms, or legs. Myoclonic
seizures are most apt to occur when waking after a
night’s sleep.
A jacksonian seizure is a partial seizure character-
ized by tingling, stiffening, or jerking of an arm or leg.
Loss of consciousness is rare. The seizure may pro-
gress in characteristic fashion along the limb.
Limp posture and a brief period of unconscious-
ness are features of akinetic seizures, which occur in
young children. Akinetic seizures, which cause the
child to fall, also are called drop attacks.
3328 Seizure disorder
PARTIAL SEIZURES. Simple partial seizures do not
spread from the focal area where they arise. Symptoms
are determined by the part of the brain affected. The
patient usually remains conscious during the seizure
and can later describe it in detail. In 2003, it was
reported that people who experience partial seizures
are twice as likely to have sleep disturbances as people
their same age and gender.
COMPLEX PARTIAL SEIZURES. A distinctive smell,
taste, or other unusual sensation (aura) may signal
the start of a complex partial seizure.
Complex partial seizures start as simple partial
seizures, but move beyond the focal area and cause
loss of consciousness. Complex partial seizures can
become major motor seizures. Although a person hav-
ing a complex partial seizure may not seem to be
unconscious, he does not know what is happening
and may behave inappropriately. He will not remem-
ber the seizure, but may seem confused or intoxicated
for a few minutes after it ends.
Causes and symptoms
The origin of 50-70% of all cases of epilepsy is
unknown. Epilepsy sometimes is the result of trauma
at birth. Such causes include insufficient oxygen to the
brain; head injury; heavy bleeding or incompatibility
between a woman’s blood and the blood of her new-
born baby; and infection immediately before, after, or
at the time of birth.
Other causes of epilepsy include:
/C15head trauma resulting from a car accident, gunshot
wound, or other injury.
/C15alcoholism
/C15brain abscess or inflammation of membranes cover-
ing the brain or spinal cord
/C15phenylketonuria (PKU, a disease that is present at
birth, often is characterized by seizures, and can
result in mental retardation) and other inherited
disorders
/C15infectious diseases like measles, mumps,a n d
diphtheria
/C15degenerative disease
/C15lead poisoning, mercury poisoning,carbon monoxide
poisoning, or ingestion of some other poisonous
substance
/C15genetic factors
Status epilepticus, a condition in which a person
suffers from continuous seizures and may have trouble
breathing, can be caused by:
/C15suddenly discontinuing anti-seizure medication
/C15hypoxic or metabolic encephalopathy (brain disease
resulting from lack of oxygen or malfunctioning of
other physical or chemical processes)
/C15acute head injury
/C15blood infection caused by inflammation of the brain
or the membranes that cover it
Diagnosis
Personal and family medical history, description
of seizure activity, and physical and neurological
examinations help primary care physicians, neurolo-
gists, and epileptologists diagnose this disorder.
Doctors rule out conditions that cause symptoms
that resemble epilepsy, including small strokes (tran-
sient ischemic attacks, or TIAs),fainting, (syncope),
pseudoseizures, and sleep attacks (narcolepsy.)
Neuropsychological testing uncovers learning or
memory problems. Neuroimaging provides views of
brain areas involved in seizure activity.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) is the main test
used to diagnose epilepsy. EEGs use electrodes placed
on or within the skull to record the brain’s electrical
activity and pinpoint the exact location of abnormal
discharges.
This patient’s brain is exposed during surgery in order for
surgeons to remove the mass responsible for his epilepsy.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)
Seizure disorder
The patient may be asked to remain motionless
during a short-term EEG or to go about his normal
activities during extended monitoring. Some patients
are deprived of sleep or exposed to seizure triggers,
such as rapid, deep breathing (hyperventilation) or
flashing lights (photic stimulation). In some cases,
people may be hospitalized for EEG monitorings
that can last as long as two weeks. Video EEGs also
document what the patient was doing when the seizure
occurred and how the seizure changed his behavior.
Other techniques used to diagnose epilepsy
include:
/C15Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which provides
clear, detailed images of the brain. Functional MRI
(fMRI), performed while the patient does various
tasks, can measure shifts in electrical intensity and
blood flow and indicate which brain region each
activity affects.
/C15Positron emission tomography (PET) and single
photon emission tomography (SPECT) monitor
blood flow and chemical activity in the brain area
being tested. PET and SPECT are very effective in
locating the brain region where metabolic changes
take place between seizures.
Treatment
The goal of epilepsy treatment is to eliminate
seizures or make the symptoms less frequent and less
severe. Long-term anticonvulsant drug therapy is the
most common form of epilepsy treatment.
Medication
A combination of drugs may be needed to control
some symptoms, but most patients who have epilepsy
take one of the following medications:
/C15Dilantin (phenytoin)
/C15Tegretol (carbamazepine)
/C15Barbita (phenobarbital)
/C15Mysoline (primidone)
/C15Depakene (valproic acid, sodium valproate)
/C15Klonopin (clonazepam)
/C15Zarontin (ethosuximide).
Dilantin, Tegretol, Barbita, and Mysoline are
used to manage or control generalized tonic-clonic
and complex partial seizures. Depakene, Klonopin,
and Zarontin are prescribed for patients who have
absence seizures.
Neurontin (gabapentin), Lamictal (lamotrigine),
and topiramate (Topamax) are among the medica-
tions more recently approved in the United States to
treat adults who have partial seizures or partial and
grand mal seizures. Another new medication called
Levetiracetam (Keppra) has been approved and
shows particularly good results in reducing partial
seizures among elderly patients with few side effects.
This is important, because elderly patients often have
other conditions and must take other medications that
might interact with seizure medications. In 2003,
Keppra’s manufacturer was working on a new anti-
epilectic drug from the same chemical family as
Keppra that should be more potent and effective.
Available medications frequently change, and it the
physician will determine the best treatment for an
individual patient. A 2003 report found that mono-
therapy, or using just one medication rather than a
combination, works better for most patients. The less
complicated the treatment, the more likely the patient
will comply and better manager the seizure disorder.
Even a patient whose seizures are well controlled
should have regular blood tests to measure levels of
anti-seizure medication in his system and to check to
see if the medication is causing any changes in his
blood or liver. A doctor should be notified if any
signs of drug toxicity appear, including uncontrolled
eye movements; sluggishness,dizziness, or hyperactiv-
ity; inability to see clearly or speak distinctly;nausea
or vomiting; or sleep problems.
Status epilepticus requires emergency treatment,
usually with Valium (Ativan), Dilantin, or Barbita. An
intravenous dextrose (sugar) solution is given to
patients whose condition is due to low blood sugar,
and a vitamin B
1 preparation is administered intrave-
nously when status epilepticus results from chronic
alcohol withdrawal. Because dextrose and thiamine
are essentially harmless and because delay in treat-
ment can be disastrous, these medications are given
routinely, as it is usually difficult to obtain an ade-
quate history from a patient suffering from status
epilepticus.
Intractable seizures are seizures that cannot be
controlled with medication or without sedation or
other unacceptable side effects. Surgery may be used
to eliminate or control intractable seizures.
Surgery
Surgery can be used to treat patients whose
intractable seizures stem from small focal lesions that
can be removed without endangering the patient,
changing the patient’s personality, dulling the
3330 Seizure disorder
patient’s senses, or reducing the patient’s ability to
function.
Each year, as many as 5,000 new patients may
become suitable candidates for surgery, which most
often is performed at a comprehensive epilepsy center.
Potential surgical candidates include patients with:
/C15partial seizures and secondarily generalized seizures
(attacks that begin in one area and spread to both
sides of the brain)
/C15seizures and childhoodparalysis on one side of the
body (hemiplegia)
/C15complex partial seizures originating in the temporal
lobe (the part of the brain associated with speech,
hearing, and smell) or other focal seizures.
(However, the risk of surgery involving the speech
centers is that the patient will lose speech function.)
/C15Generalized myoclonic seizures or generalized sei-
zures featuring temporary paralysis (akinetic) or
loss of muscle tone (atonal)
A physical examinationis conducted to verify that
a patient’s seizures are caused by epilepsy, and surgery
is not used to treat patients with severe psychiatric
disturbances or medical problems that raise risk fac-
tors to unacceptable levels.
Surgery is never indicated unless:
/C15the best available anti-seizure medications have failed
to control the patient’s symptoms satisfactorily
/C15the origin of the patient’s seizures has been precisely
located
/C15there is good reason to believe that surgery will signifi-
cantly improve the patient’s health and quality of life.
Every patient considering epilepsy surgery is care-
fully evaluated by one or more neurologists, neurosur-
geons, neuropsychologists, and/or social workers. A
psychiatrist, chaplain, or other spiritual advisor may
help the patient and his family cope with thestress that
occurs during and after the selection process.
TYPES OF SURGERY. Surgical techniques used to
treat intractable epilepsy include:
/C15Lesionectomy. Removing the lesion (diseased brain
tissue) and some surrounding brain tissue is very
effective in controlling seizures. Lesionectomy is gen-
erally more successful than surgery performed on
patients whose seizures are not caused by clearly
defined lesions, but removing only part of the lesion
lessens the effectiveness of the procedure.
/C15Temporal resections. Removing part of the temporal
lobe and the part of the brain associated with feel-
ings, memory, and emotions (the hippocampus) pro-
vides good or excellent seizure control in 75-80% of
properly selected patients with appropriate types of
temporal lobe epilepsy. Some patients experience
post-operative speech and memory problems.
/C15Extra-temporal resection. This procedure involves
removing some or all of the frontal lobe, the part of
the brain directly behind the forehead. The frontal
lobe helps regulate movement, planning, judgment,
and personality, and special care must be taken to
prevent post-operative problems with movement and
speech. Extra-temporal resection is most successful
in patients whose seizures are not widespread.
/C15Hemispherectomy. This method of removing brain
tissue is restricted to patients with severe epilepsy and
abnormal discharges that often extend from one side
of the brain to the other. Hemispherectomies most
often are performed on infants or young children
who have had an extensive brain disease or disorder
since birth or from a very young age.
/C15Corpus callosotomy. This procedure, an alternative
to hemispherectomy in patients with congenital
hemiplegia, removes some or all of the white matter
that separates the two halves of the brain. Corpus
callosotomy is performed almost exclusively on chil-
dren who are frequently injured during falls caused
This abstract artwork is based on a patient’s description of
what an epileptic seizure feels like. Epileptic seizures are
caused by chaotic electrical activity in the brain. They can
be triggered by a variety of factors, such as illness or stress,
although the underlying causes is not completely under-
stood. (Illustration by John Bavosi, Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced by permission.)
Seizure disorder