DISEASE: Typhoid Fever
SOURCE: Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine, 3rd Edition
CONTEXT: Relevant to tropical/sub-Saharan Africa including Cameroon
============================================================

Symptoms
Septic shock is usually preceded by bacteremia,
which is marked byfever, malaise, chills, andnausea.
The first sign of shock is often confusion and
decreased consciousness. In this beginning stage, the
extremities are usually warm. Later, they become cool,
pale, and bluish. Fever may give way to lower than
normal temperatures later on in sepsis.
Other symptoms include:
/C15rapid heartbeat
/C15shallow, rapid breathing
/C15decreased urination.
/C15reddish patches in the skin
Septic shock may progress to cause ‘‘adult respira-
tory distress syndrome,’’ in which fluid collects in the
lungs, and breathing becomes very shallow and
labored. This condition may lead to ventilatory col-
lapse, in which the patient can no longer breathe ade-
quately without assistance.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of septic shock is made by measuring
blood pressure, heart rate, and respiration rate, as well
as by a consideration of possible sources of infection.
Blood pressure may be monitored with a catheter
device inserted into the pulmonary artery supplying
the lungs (Swan-Ganz catheter). Blood cultures are
done to determine the type of bacteria responsible.
The levels of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and acidity in
the blood are also monitored to assess changes in
respiratory function.
Treatment
Septic shock is treated initially with a combina-
tion ofantibiotics and fluid replacement. The antibio-
tic is chosen based on the bacteria present, although
two or more types of antibiotics may be used initially
until the organism is identified. Intravenous fluids,
either blood or protein solutions, replace the fluid
lost by leakage. Coagulation and hemorrhage may be
treated with transfusions of plasma or platelets.
Dopamine may be given to increase blood pressure
further if necessary.
Respiratory distress is treated with mechanical
ventilation and supplemental oxygen, either using a
nosepiece or a tube into the trachea through the throat.
Identification and treatment of the primary infec-
tion site is important to prevent ongoing proliferation
of bacteria.
Prognosis
Septic shock is most likely to develop in the hos-
pital, since it follows infections which are likely to be
the objects of treatment. Because of this, careful mon-
itoring and early, aggressive therapy can minimize the
likelihood of progression. Nonetheless, death occurs
in at least 25% of all cases.
The likelihood of recovery from septic shock
depends on may factors, including the degree of
immunosuppression of the patient, underlying dis-
ease, promptness of treatment, and type of bacteria
responsible. Mortality is highest in the very young
and the elderly, those with persistent or recurrent
infection, and those with compromised immune
systems.
Prevention
The risk of developing septic shock can be mini-
mized through treatment of underlying bacterial infec-
tions, and prompt attention to signs of bacteremia. In
the hospital, scrupulous aseptic technique on the part
of medical professionals lowers the risk of introducing
bacteria into the bloodstream.
Resources
OTHER
The Merck Page. April 13, 1998. <http://
www.merck.com> .
Richard Robinson
Septoplasty
Definition
Septoplasty is a surgical procedure to correct the
shape of the septum of the nose. The nasal septum is
the separation between the two nostrils. In adults, the
septum is composed partly of cartilage and partly of
bone.
KEY TERMS
Bacteremia— Invasion of the bloodstream by
bacteria.
Septoplasty
Purpose
Septoplasty is performed to correct a crooked
(deviated) or dislocated septum, often as part ofplastic
surgery of the nose (rhinoplasty). The nasal septum has
three functions: to support the nose, regulate air flow,
and support the mucous membranes (mucosa) of the
nose. Septoplasty is done to correct the shape of the
nose caused by a deformed septum or correct deregu-
lated air flow caused by adeviated septum. Septoplasty
is often needed when the patient is having an operation
to reduce the size of the nose (reductive rhinoplasty),
because this operation usually reduces the amount of
breathing space in the nose.
Septoplasty may also be done as a follow-up
procedure following facial trauma, as the nose is
frequently broken or dislocated by blows to the face
resulting from automobile accidents, criminal
assaults, orsports injuries.
Precautions
Septoplasty is ordinarily not performed within six
months of a traumatic injury to the nose.
Description
Septoplasties are performed in the hospital with a
combination of local and intravenous anesthesia. In
some cases, hypnosis has been successfully used as
anesthesia. After the patient is anesthetized, the sur-
geon makes a cut (incision) in the mucous tissue that
covers the part of the septum that is made of cartilage.
The tissue is lifted, exposing the cartilage and bony
part of the septum. Usually, one side of the mucous
tissue is left intact to provide support during healing.
Cartilage is cut away as needed.
As the surgeon cuts away the cartilage, deformi-
ties tend to straighten themselves out, reducing the
amount of cartilage that must be cut. Once the carti-
lage is cut, bony deformities can be corrected. For
most patients, this is the extent of the surgery required
to improve breathing through the nose and correct
deformities. Some patients have bony obstructions at
the base of the nasal chamber and require further
surgery. These obstructions include bony spurs and
ridges that contribute to drying, ulceration, or bleed-
ing of the mucous tissue that covers the inside of the
nasal passages. In these cases, the extent of the surgery
depends on the nature of the deformities that need
correcting.
During surgery, the patient’s own cartilage that
has been removed can be reused to provide support for
the nose if needed. External septum supports are not
usually needed. Splints may be needed occasionally to
support cartilage when extensive cutting has been
done. External splints can be used to support the
cartilage for the first few days of healing. Tefla gauze
is inserted in the nostril to support the flaps and
cartilage and to absorb any bleeding or mucus.
A newer option for closing perforations in the
septum is a button made of Silastic, a compound of
silicone and rubber.
Preparation
Before performing a septoplasty, the surgeon will
evaluate the difference in airflow between the two
nostrils. In children, this assessment can be done very
simply by asking the child to breathe out slowly on a
small mirror held in front of the nose.
As with any other operation under general
anesthesia, patients are evaluated for any physical
conditions that might complicate surgery and for any
medications that might affect blood clotting time.
Aftercare
Patients with septoplasties are usually sent home
from the hospital later the same day or the morning
after the surgery. All dressings inside the nose are
removed before the patient leaves. Aftercare includes
a list of detailed instructions for the patient that focus
on preventing trauma to the nose.
Risks
The risks from a septoplasty are similar to those
from other operations on the face: postoperative
pain with some bleeding, swelling, bruising, or
KEY TERMS
Cartilage— A tough, elastic connective tissue found
in the joints, outer ear, nose, larynx, and other parts
of the body.
Rhinoplasty— Plastic surgery of the nose.
Septum (plural, septa)— The dividing partition in
the nose that separates the two nostrils. It is com-
posed of bone and cartilage.
Splint— A thin piece of rigid material that is some-
times used during nasal surgery to hold certain
structures in place until healing is underway.
3352 Septoplasty
discoloration. A few patients may have allergic reac-
tions to the anesthetics. The operation in itself, how-
ever, is relatively low-risk in that it does not involve
major blood vessels or vital organs. Infection is unli-
kely if proper surgical technique is observed.
Normal results
Normal results include improved breathing and
airflow through the nostrils, and an acceptable out-
ward shape of the nose.
Resources
BOOKS
Beers, Mark H., MD, and Robert Berkow, MD., editors.
‘‘Septal Deviation and Perforation.’’ Section 7, Chapter
86 InThe Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy.
Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research
Laboratories, 2004.
PERIODICALS
Piatti, G., A. Scotti, and U. Ambrosetti. ‘‘Nasal Ciliary Beat
after Insertion of Septo-Valvular Splints.’’
Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery130 (May
2004): 558–562.
Wain, H. J. ‘‘Reflections on Hypnotizability and Its Impact
on Successful Surgical Hypnosis: A Sole Anesthetic for
Septoplasty.’’ American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis46
(April 2004): 313–321.
ORGANIZATIONS
American Academy of Facial Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery (AAFPRS). 310 South Henry Street,
Alexandria, VA 22314. (703) 299-9291. <http://
www.facemd.org> .
American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS). 444 East
Algonquin Road, Arlington Heights, IL 60005. (847)
228-9900. <http://www.plasticsurgery.org> .
John T. Lohr, PhD
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Septum perforation see Perforated septum
Serenoa repens see Saw palmetto
Serotonin boosters see Selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors
Serum albumin test see Protein components
test
Serum globulin test see Protein components
test
Serum hepatitis see Hepatitis B
Serum protein electrophoresis see Protein
electrophoresis
Serum sickness
Definition
Serum sickness is a type of delayed allergic
response, appearing four to 10 days after exposure to
some antibiotics or antiserum, the portion of serum
that contains antibodies, such as gamma globulin,
which may be given to provide immunization against
some diseases.
Description
Serum sickness is very similar to an allergic reac-
tion. The patient’s immune system recognizes the
proteins in the drug or antiserum as foreign proteins,
and produces its own antibodies to protect against the
foreign proteins. The newly formed antibodies bind
with the foreign protein to form immune complexes.
These immune complexes may enter the walls of blood
vessels where they set off an inflammatory reaction.
While other types of allergic reactions may pro-
duce a rapid response, the serum sickness reaction is
delayed because it takes time for the body to produce
antibodies to the new protein.
Causes and symptoms
The usual symptoms are severe skin reactions,
often on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.
Fever, sometimes as high as 104o F, is always present
and usually appears before the skin rash.
Joint pain may be reported in up to 50% of cases.
This is usually seen in the larger joints, but occasion-
ally the finger and toe joints may also be involved.
Swelling of lymph nodes, particularly around the
site of the injection, is seen in 10–20% of cases. There
may also be swelling of the head and neck.
Urine analysis may show traces of blood and
protein in the urine.
Other symptoms may involve the heart and cen-
tral nervous system. These may include changes in
vision, and difficulty in movement. Breathing diffi-
culty may occur.
Traditionally, antitoxins were the most common
cause of serum sickness, but those reports date from a
time when most antitoxins were made from horse
serum. As many as 16% of the people who received
antirabies serum derived from horses developed serum
sickness. The risk of a reaction to antitoxins has
dropped dramatically since manufacturers have
Serum sickness
started using human serum instead of horse serum to
make their products.
Although antitoxins are the most common cause
of serum sickness, a number of drugs have been
reported to cause a serum sickness reaction. The
following list is not complete, but indicates some of
the drugs that have been associated with this type of
reaction:
/C15allopurinol (Zyloprim)
/C15barbiturates
/C15captopril (Capoten)
/C15cephalosporin antibiotics
/C15griseofulvin (Fulvicin, Grifulvin)
/C15penicillins
/C15pehnytoin (Dilantin)
/C15procainamide (Procan SR, Procanbid, Pronestyl-SR)
/C15quinidine (Quinaglute, Quinidex, Quinora)
/C15streptokinase (Streptase, Kabikinase)
/C15sulfonamide antibacterial drugs
Of cases of serum sickness reported to the United
States Food and Drug Administration, the drugs most
commonly associated with the reaction have been the
cephalosporin antibiotics, including cefaclor (Ceclor)
and cefalexin (Keflex) and the sulfonamide com-
bination trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim,
Septra.) This does not mean that these are high-risk
drugs, since these drugs are very widely used, so that
there are many people exposed to them.
In addition to these substances, allergenic extracts
used for testing and immunization, hormones, and
vaccines have been known to cause serum sickness.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by observing the symptoms and
reviewing the patient’s medical and medication his-
tory. Although the symptoms of serum sickness may
be similar to other conditions, patients who present
with symptoms of serum sickness and who have a
recent history of exposure to a drug or other product
which may cause this type of reaction should be
suspected of having serum sickness.
Treatment
The first step in treatment of serum sickness is
always to discontinue the drug or other substance
which is suspected of causing the reaction. After that,
all treatment is symptomatic. Antihistamines, pain
relievers, and corticosteroids may be given to relieve
the symptoms. The choice of treatment depends on the
severity of the reaction.
Prognosis
Most serum sickness reactions are mild, and dis-
appear on their own after one or two weeks as long as
the cause is removed. Sometimes, symptoms of pain
and discomfort may continue for several weeks, even
after all the observable reactions such as skin rash and
protein in the urine have disappeared. In very rare
cases, however, there can be severe reactions and per-
manent damage. In very rare but extreme cases, serum
sickness can lead toshock, permanent kidney damage,
and evendeath.
Prevention
The most effective method of prevention is simple
avoidance of antitoxins that may cause serum sick-
ness. If patients have had a reaction in the past, parti-
cularly if the reaction was to a commonly used drug,
KEY TERMS
Allergy— Altered body reaction, usually hypersen-
sitivity, as a response to exposure to a specific
substance.
Antibody— Any of a large number of proteins that
are produced after stimulation by an antigen and
act specifically against the antigen in an immune
response.
Antihistamine— A drug that inhibits the actions of
histamine. Histamine causes dilatation of capil-
laries, contraction of smooth muscle, and stimula-
tion of gastric acid secretion.
Antitoxin— An antibody that is capable of neutra-
lizing the specific toxin (a specific cause of disease)
that stimulated its production in the body and is
produced in animals for medical purposes by injec-
tion of a toxin or toxoid with the resulting serum
being used to counteract the toxin in other
individuals.
Serum— The clear yellowish fluid that remains
from blood plasma after fibrinogen, prothrombin,
and other clotting factors have been removed by
clot formation—called also blood serum.
Sulfonamide— A sulfa drug, one of a large group of
drugs used to treat bacterial infections.
3354 Serum sickness
they should be made aware of it, and be advised to
alert physicians and hospitals in the future. Patients
who have had particularly severe reactions may be
advised to wear identification bracelets, or use other
means to alert health care providers.
When it is necessary to administer an antitoxin,
skin tests may be used to identify people who are at
risk of a reaction. If the situation does not allow
enough time for skin testing, the antitoxin should be
given along with an intravenous antihistamine. Other
drugs, such as epinephrine, which may be needed for
an emergency, should be available.
Resources
BOOKS
1999 Year Book: Allergy and Clinical Immunology.Saint
Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1999.
PERIODICALS
‘‘Children at Rrisk from Medication Mistakes.’’Houston
Chronicle May 18, 2001.
‘‘Drug allergies.’’Pediatrics for Parents18 (2000):1.
Fielding, Jonathan. ‘‘Our Health; Drug Reactions Differ
From Side Effects.’’The Los Angeles Times
February 7, 2000.
‘‘VA Hospitals Test Smart Cards for Patient Information.’’
Computerworld May 14, 2001.
ORGANIZATIONS
Action Against Allergy (AAA). PO Box 278, Twickenham
Middlesex, Greater London TW1 4QQ, England.
American Allergy Association (AAA). 3104 E Camelback,
Ste. 459 Phoenix, AZ 85016.
Samuel D. Uretsky, PharmD
Serum therapy see Gammaglobulin
Severe acute respiratory
syndrome (SARS)
Definition
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) is the
first emergent and highly transmissible viral disease to
appear during the twenty-first century.
Description
Patients with SARS develop flu-likefever, head-
ache, malaise, drycough and other breathing difficul-
ties. Many patients developpneumonia, and in 5–10%
of cases, the pneumonia and other complications are
severe enough to causedeath. SARS is caused by a
virus that is transmitted usually from person to per-
son—predominantly by the aerosolized droplets of
virus infected material.
The first known case of SARS was traced to a
November 2002 case in Guangdong province, China.
By mid-February 2003, Chinese health officials
tracked more than 300 cases, including five deaths in
Guangdong province from what was at the time
described as an acute respiratory syndrome. Many
flu-causing viruses have previously originated from
Guangdong province because of cultural and exotic
cuisine practices that bring animals, animal parts, and
humans into close proximity. In such an environment,
pathogens can more easily genetically mutate and
make the leap from animal hosts to humans. The
first cases of SARS showed high rates among
Guangdong food handlers and chefs.
Chinese health officials initially remained silent
about the outbreak, and no special precautions were
taken to limit travel or prevent the spread of the dis-
ease. The world health community, therefore, had no
chance to institute testing,isolation, and quarantine
measures that might have prevented the subsequent
global spread of the disease.
On February 21, Liu Jianlun, a 64-year-old
Chinese physician from Zhongshan hospital (later
determined to have been ‘‘super-spreader,’’ a person
capable of infecting unusually high numbers of
contacts) traveled to Hong Kong to attend a family
wedding despite the fact that he had a fever.
Epidemiologists subsequently determined that,
Jianlun passed on the SARS virus to other guests at
the Metropole Hotel where he stayed—including an
American businessman en route to Hanoi, three
women from Singapore, two Canadians, and a Hong
Kong resident. Jianlun’s travel to Hong Kong and the
subsequent travel of those he infected allowed SARS
to spread from China to the infected travelers’
destinations.
Johnny Chen, the American businessman, grew ill
in Hanoi, Vietnam, and was admitted to a local hospi-
tal. Chen infected 20 health care workers at the hospi-
tal including noted Italian epidemiologist Carlo
Urbani who worked at the Hanoi World Health
Organization (WHO) office. Urbani provided medical
care for Chen and first formally identified SARS as a
unique disease on February 28, 2003. By early March,
22 hospital workers in Hanoi were ill with SARS.
Unaware of the problems in China, Urbani’s
report drew increased attention among epidemiolo-
gists when coupled with news reports in mid-March
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
that Hong Kong health officials had also discovered
an outbreak of an acute respiratory syndrome among
health care workers. Unsuspecting hospital workers
admitted the Hong Kong man infected by Jianlun to a
general ward at the Prince of Wales Hospital because
it was assumed he had a typical severe pneumonia—a
fairly routine admission. The first notice that clini-
cians were dealing with an unusual illness came—not
from health notices from China of increasing illnesses
and deaths due to SARS—but from the observation
that hospital staff, along with those subsequently
determined to have been in close proximity to the
infected persons, began to show signs of illness.
Eventually, 138 people, including 34 nurses, 20 doc-
tors, 16 medical students, and 15 other health care
workers, contracted pneumonia.
One of the most intriguing aspects of the early
Hong Kong cases was a cluster of more than 250
SARS cases that occurred in a cluster of high-rise
apartment buildings—many housing health care
workers—that provided evidence of a high rate of
secondary transmission. Epidemiologists conducted
extensive investigations to rule out the hypothesis
that the illnesses were related to some form of local
contamination (e.g., sewage, bacteria on the ventila-
tion system, etc.). Rumors began that the illness was
due to cockroaches or rodents, but no scientific evi-
dence supported the hypothesis that the disease patho-
gen was carried by insects or animals.
Hong Kong authorities then decided that those
suffering the flu-like symptoms would be given the
option of self-isolation, with family members allowed
to remain confined at home or in special camps.
Compliance checks were conducted by police.
One of the Canadians infected in Hong Kong,
Kwan Sui-Chu, return to Toronto, Ontario, and died
in a Toronto hospital on March 5. As in Hong Kong,
because there were no alert from China about the
SARS outbreak, Canadian officials did not initially
suspect that Sui-Chu had been infected with a highly
contagious virus, until Sui-Chu’s son and five health
care workers showed similar symptoms. By mid-April,
Canada reported more than 130 SARS cases and 15
fatalities.
Increasingly faced with reports that provided evi-
dence of global dissemination, on March 15, 2003, the
World Health Organization (WHO) took the unusual
step of issuing a travel warning that described
SARS is a ‘‘worldwide health threat.’’ WHO officials
announced that SARS cases, and potential cases, had
been tracked from China to Singapore, Thailand,
Vietnam, Indonesia, Philippines, and Canada.
Although the exact cause of the ‘‘acute respiratory
syndrome’’ had not, at that time, been determined,
WHO officials issuance of the precautionary warning
to travelers bound for Southeast Asia about the poten-
tial SARS risk served as notice to public health
officials about the potential dangers of SARS.
Within days of the first WHO warning, SARS
cases were reported in United Kingdom, Spain,
Slovenia, Germany, and in the United States.
WHO officials were initially encouraged that iso-
lation procedures and alerts were working to stem the
spread of SARS, as some countries reporting small
numbers of cases experienced no further dissemina-
tion to hospital staff or others in contact with SARS
victims. However, in some countries, including
Canada, where SARS cases occurred before WHO
alerts, SARS continued to spread beyond the bounds
of isolated patients.
WHO officials responded by recommending
increased screening and quarantine measures that
included mandatory screening of persons returning
from visits to the most severely affected areas in
China, Southeast Asia, and Hong Kong.
In early April 2003, WHO took the controversial
additional step of recommending against non-essential
travel to Hong Kong and the Guangdong province of
China. The recommendation, sought by infectious
disease specialists, was not controversial within the
medical community, but caused immediate concern
regarding the potentially widespread economic impacts.
Mounting reports of SARS showed a increasing
global dissemination of the virus. By April 9, the first
confirmed reports of SARS cases in Africa reached
WHO headquarters, and eight days later, a confirmed
case was discovered in India.
Causes and symptoms
In mid-April 2003, Canadian scientists at the
British Columbia Cancer Agency in Vancouver
announced that they that sequenced the genome of
the coronavirus most likely to be the cause of SARS.
Within days, scientists at the Centers for Disease
Control (CDC) in Atlanta, Georgia, offered a genomic
map that confirmed more than 99% of the Canadian
findings.
Both genetic maps were generated from studies of
viruses isolated from SARS cases. The particular cor-
onavirus mapped had a genomic sequence of 29,727
nucleotides—average for the family of coronavirus
that typically contain between 29,000-31,000
nucleotides.
3356 Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
Proof that the coronavirus mapped was the speci-
fic virus responsible for SARS would eventually come
from animal testing. Rhesus monkeys were exposed to
the virus via injection and inhalation and then mon-
itored to determine whether SARS like symptoms
developed, and then if sick animals exhibited a histo-
logical pathology (i.e., an examination of the tissue and
cellular level pathology) similar to findings in human
patients. Other tests, including polymerase chain reac-
tion (PCR) testing helped positively match the specific
coronavirus present in the lung tissue, blood, and feces
of infected animals to the exposure virus.
Identification of a specific pathogen can be a com-
plex process, and positive identification requires thou-
sands of tests. All testing is conducted with regard to
testing Koch’s postulates—the four conditions that
must be met for an organism to be determined to the
cause of a disease. First, the organism must be present
in every case of the disease. Second, the organism must
be able to be isolated from the host and grown in
laboratory conditions. Third, the disease must be
reproduced when the isolated organism is introduced
into another, healthy host. The fourth postulate
stipulates that the same organism must be able to be
recovered and purified from the host that was experi-
mentally infected.
Early data indicates that SARS has an incubation
period range of two to 10 days, with an average incu-
bation of about four days. Much of the inoculation
period allows the virus to be both transported and
spread by an asymptomatic carrier. With air travel,
asymptotic carriers can travel to anywhere in the
world. The initial symptoms are non-specific and com-
mon to the flu. Infected cases then typically spike a
high fever 100.48F (388C) as they develop a cough,
shortness of breath, and difficulty breathing. SARS
often fulminates (reaches it maximum progression) in
a severe pneumonia that can causerespiratory failure
and death in about 10% of its victims.
Diagnosis
Currently, initial tests include blood cultures,
Gram stain, chest radiograph, and tests for other
viral respiratory pathogens such asinfluenza A and
B. Other serologic techniques are used, and if SARS is
suspected, samples are forwarded to state/local public
health departments and/or the CDC for coronavirus
antibody testing.
Treatment
As of May 1, 2003, no therapy was demonstrated
to have clinical effectiveness against the virus that
causes SARS, and physicians could offer only suppor-
tive therapy (e.g. administration of fluids, oxygen,
ventilation, etc.).
Prognosis
By late April/early May 2003, WHO officials had
confirmed reports of more than 3,000 cases of SARS
from 18 different countries with 111 deaths attributed
to the disease (about a 5–10% death rate). United
States health officials reported 193 cases with no
deaths. Significantly, all but 20 of the U.S. cases were
linked to travel to infected areas, and the other 20
cases were accounted for by secondary transmission
from infected patients to family members and health
care workers.
Information on countries reporting SARS and the
cumulative total of cases and deaths is updated each
day on the WHO SARS web site at <http;//
www.who.int/csr/sarscountry/en/>.
Prevention
Until a vaccine is developed, isolation and quar-
antine remain potent tools in the modern public health
arsenal. Both procedures seek to control exposure to
infected individuals or materials. Isolation procedures
are used with patients with a confirmed illness.
Quarantine rules and procedures apply to individuals
who are not currently ill, but are known to have been
exposed to the illness (e.g., been in the company of a
infected person or come in contact with infected
materials).
Isolation and quarantine both act to restrict
movement and to slow or stop the spread of disease
within a community. Depending on the illness,
patients placed in isolation may be cared for in hospi-
tals, specialized health care facilities, or in less severe
cases, at home. Isolation is a standard procedure for
TB patients. In most cases, isolation is voluntary;
however, isolation can be compelled by federal, state,
and some local law.
States governments within the United States have
a general authority to set and enforce quarantine con-
ditions. At the federal level, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention’s (CDC) Division of Global
Migration and Quarantine is empowered to detain,
examine, or conditionally release (release with restric-
tions on movement or with a required treatment pro-
tocol) individuals suspected of carrying certain listed
communicable diseases.
As of April 27, 2003, the CDC in Atlanta recom-
mended SARS patients be voluntarily isolated, but
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
had not recommended enforced isolation or quaran-
tine. Regardless, CDC and other public heath offi-
cials, including the Surgeon General, sought and
secured increased powers to deal with SARS. On
April 4, 2003, U.S. President George W. Bush signed
Presidential Executive Order 13295 that added SARS
to a list of quarantinable communicable diseases.
The order provided health officials with the broader
powers to seek ‘‘...apprehension, detention, or condi-
tional release of individuals to prevent the intro-
duction, transmission, or spread of suspected
communicable diseases...’’
Travel advisories issued by WHO should be
reviewed and people who must travel to areas with
SARS outbreaks should follow such preventative
measures as frequent hand washing and avoidance of
large crowds. Likewise, family members caring for
suspected and/or confirmed SARS patients should
wash hands frequently, avoid direct contact with the
patient’s bodily fluids, and monitor their own possible
development of symptoms closely.
Brenda Wilmoth Lerner
K. Lee Lerner
Severe combined
immunodeficiency
Definition
Severe combinedimmunodeficiency (SCID) is the
most serious human immunodeficiency disorder(s). It
is a group of congenital disorders in which both the
humoral part of the patient’s immune system and the
cells involved in immune responses fail to work prop-
erly. Children with SCID are vulnerable to recurrent
severe infections, retarded growth, and earlydeath.
Description
SCID is thought to affect between one in every
100,000 persons, and one in every 500,000 infants.
Several different immune system disorders are cur-
rently grouped under SCID:
/C15Swiss-type agammaglobulinemia. This was the first
type of SCID discovered, in Switzerland in the
1950s.
/C15Adenosine deaminase deficiency (ADA). About
50% of SCID cases are of this type. ADA deficiency
leads to low levels of B and T cells in the child’s
immune system.
/C15Autosomal recessive. About 40% of SCID cases are
inherited from the parents in an autosomal recessive
pattern.
/C15Bare lymphocyte syndrome. In this form of SCID,
the white blood cells (lymphocytes) in the baby’s
blood are missing certain proteins. Without these
proteins, the lymphocytes cannot activate the
T cells in the immune system.
/C15SCID with leukopenia. Children with this form of
SCID are lacking a type of white blood cell called a
granulocyte.
In order to understand why SCID is considered
the most severe immunodeficiency disorder, it is help-
ful to have an outline of the parts of the human
immune system. It has three parts: cellular, humoral,
and nonspecific. The cellular and humoral parts of
the system are both needed to fight infections–
they recognize disease agents and attack them. The
cellular system is composed of many classes of
T-lymphocytes (white blood cells that detect foreign
invaders called antigens). The humoral system is
made up of B cells, which are the only cells in the
body that make antibodies. In SCID, neither the
cellular nor the humoral part of the immune system
is working properly.
Causes and symptoms
SCID is an inherited disorder. There are two ways
in which a developing fetus’ immune system can fail to
develop normally. In the first type of genetic problem,
both B and T cells are defective. In the second type,
only the T cells are abnormal, but their defect affects
the functioning of the B cells.
For the first few months of life, a child with SCID
is protected by antibodies in the mother’s blood. As
early as three months of age, however, the SCID child
begins to suffer from mouth infections (thrush),
chronic diarrhea, otitis media and pulmonary infec-
tions, including pneumocystis pneumonia. The child
loses weight, becomes very weak, and eventually dies
from an opportunistic infection.
Diagnosis
SCID is diagnosed by the typing of T and B cells in
the child’s blood. B cells can be detected by immuno-
fluorescence tests for surface markers (unique protein-
s)on the cells. T cells can be identified in tissue sections
(samples) using enzyme-labeled antibodies.
3358 Severe combined immunodeficiency
Treatment
Patients with SCID can be treated with anti-
biotics and immune serum to protect them from infec-
tions, but these treatments cannot cure the disorder.
Bone marrow transplants are currently regarded
as one of the few effective standard treatments for
SCID.
Investigational treatments
In 1990, the Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approved PEG-ADA, an orphan drug (not
available in US but available elsewhere), for the treat-
ment of SCID. PEG-ADA, which is also called
pegademase bovine, works by replacing the ADA
deficiency in children with this form of SCID.
Children who receive weekly injections of PEG-ADA
appear to have normal immune functions restored.
Another treatment that is still in the experimental
stage is gene therapy. In gene therapy, the children
receive periodic infusions of their own T cells cor-
rected with a gene for ADA that has been implanted
in an activated virus.
Prognosis
Currently, there is no cure for SCID. Most
untreated patients die before age two.
Prevention
Genetic counselingis recommended for parents of
a child with SCID.
Resources
ORGANIZATIONS
Immune Deficiency Foundation. 25 W. Chesapeake Ave.,
Suite 206, Towson, MD 21204. (800) 296-4433.
<http://www.primaryimmune.org> .
National Organization for Rare Disorders. P.O. Box 8923,
New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673.
<http://www.rarediseases.org> .
Rebecca J. Frey, PhD
Sex hormones tests
Definition
Sex hormones tests measure levels of the sex hor-
mones, including estrogen, progesterone, and
testosterone.
Purpose
The sex hormone tests are ordered to determine if
secretion of these hormones is normal. Estrogen frac-
tion test is done to evaluate sexual maturity, menstrual
problems, and fertility problems in females. This test
may also be used to test for tumors that excrete
KEY TERMS
Adenosine deaminase (ADA)— An enzyme that is
lacking in a specific type of SCID. Children with an
ADA deficiency have low levels of both B and T
cells.
Antigens— A substance that usually causes the for-
mation of an antibody. A foreign invaders in the
body.
Autosomal recessive inheritance— A pattern of
inheritance of a recessive gene where, among
other things, both parents may not show symptoms.
B cell— A type of lymphocyte or white blood cell
that is derived from precursor cells in the bone
marrow.
Congenital— Present at the time of birth. Most
forms of SCID are hereditary as well as congenital.
Gene therapy— An experimental treatment for
SCID that consists of implanting a gene for ADA
into an activated virus and merging it with some of
the patient’s own T cells. The corrected T cells are
infused back into the patient every few months.
Humoral— Pertaining to or derived from a body
fluid. The humoral part of the immune system
includes antibodies and immunoglobulins in
blood serum.
Lymphocyte— A type of white blood cell that is
important in the formation of antibodies.
Orphan drug— A drug that is known to be useful in
treatment but lacks sufficient funding for further
research and development.
PEG-ADA— An orphan drug that is useful in treat-
ing SCID related to ADA deficiency.
T cells— Lymphocytes that originate in the thymus
gland. T cells regulate the immune system’s
response to infections. The thymus gland is small
or underdeveloped in children with SCID.
Thrush— A disease of the mouth caused by a yeast,
Candida albicans.
Sex hormones tests
estrogen. In pregnant women it aids in determining
fetal-placental health. Estrogen fraction is also used to
evaluate males who have enlargement of one or both
breasts (gynecomastia), or who have feminization syn-
dromes, where they display female sex characteristics.
Progesterone assay test is ordered to evaluate
women who are having difficulty becoming pregnant
or maintaining apregnancy, and to monitor high-risk
pregnancies.
Testosterone levels are ordered to evaluate:
/C15ambiguous sex characteristics
/C15precocious puberty
/C15virilizing syndromes in the female
/C15infertility in the male
/C15rare tumors of the ovary and testicle
Description
The sex hormones control the development of
primary and secondary sexual characteristics. They
regulate the sex-related functions of the body, such
as the menstrual cycle or the production of eggs or
sperm. There are three main types of sex hormones:
/C15the female sex hormones (called the estrogen
hormones)
/C15the progesterone hormones (which help the body
prepare for and maintain pregnancy)
/C15the male sex hormones, or the androgen hormones
Female sex hormones are responsible for normal
menstruation and the development of secondary
female characteristics. Testosterone is a hormone
that inducespuberty in the male and maintains male
secondary sex characteristics. In females, the adrenal
glands and the ovaries secrete small amounts of
testosterone.
Estrogen
Estrogen is tested to evaluate menstrual status,
sexual maturity, and gynecomastia (or feminization
syndromes). It is a tumor marker for patients with
certain ovarian tumors. E1, a type of estrogen, is the
most active estrogen in the nonpregnant female.
E3 (estriol) is the major estrogen in the pregnant
female. It is produced in the placenta. Excretion of
estriol increases around the eighth week of gestation
and continues to rise until shortly before delivery.
Serial urine and blood studies of this hormone are
used to assess placental function and fetal normality
in high-risk pregnancies. Falling values during
pregnancy suggest fetoplacental deterioration and
require prompt reassessment of the pregnancy, includ-
ing the possibility of early delivery.
Progesterone
Progesterone is essential for the healthy function-
ing of the female reproductive system. Produced in the
ovaries during the second half of the menstrual cycle,
and by the placenta during pregnancy, small amounts
of progesterone are also produced in the adrenal
glands and testes.
After ovulation, an increase of progesterone
causes the uterine lining to thicken in preparation for
the implantation of a fertilized egg. If this event does
not take place, progesterone and estrogen levels fall,
resulting in shedding of the uterine lining.
Progesterone is essential during pregnancy, not
only ensuring normal functioning of the placenta,
but passing into the developing baby’s circulation,
where it is converted in the adrenal glands to corticos-
teroid hormones.
Testosterone
Testosterone is the most important of the male sex
hormones. It is responsible for stimulating bone and
muscle growth, and sexual development. It is pro-
duced by the testes and in very small amounts by the
ovaries. Most testosterone tests measure total
testosterone.
Testosterone stimulates sperm production (sper-
matogenesis), and influences the development of male
secondary sex characteristics. Overproduction of tes-
tosterone caused by testicular, adrenal, orpituitary
tumors in the young male may result in precocious
puberty.
Overproduction of testosterone in females, caused
by ovarian and adrenal tumors, can result in masculi-
nization, the symptoms of which include cessation of
the menstrual cycle (amenorrhea) and excessive
growth of body hair (hirsutism).
When reduced levels of testosterone in the male
indicate underactivity of the testes (hypogonadism),
testosterone stimulation tests may be ordered.
Preparation
The progesterone and testosterone tests require a
blood sample; it is not necessary for the patient to
restrict food or fluids before the test. Testosterone
specimens should be drawn in the morning, as testos-
terone levels are highest in the early morning hours.
3360 Sex hormones tests
The estrogen fraction test can be performed on blood
and/or urine. It is not necessary for the patient to
restrict food or fluids for either test. If a 24-hour
urine test has been requested, the patient should call
the laboratory for instructions.
Risks
Risks for these blood tests are minimal, but may
include slight bleeding from the puncture site,fainting
or feeling lightheaded after having blood drawn, or
blood accumulating under the puncture site
(hematoma).
Normal results
Estrogen levels vary in women, ranging from 24–
149 picograms per ml of blood. In men, the normal
range is between 12–34 picograms per ml of blood.
Progesterone levels vary from less than 150 nano-
grams per deciliter (ng/dL) of blood to 2,000 nano-
grams in menstruating women. During pregnancy,
progesterone levels range from 1,500–20,000 ng/dL
of blood.
Testosterone values vary from laboratory to
laboratory, but can generally be found within the
following levels:
/C15Men. 300–1,200 ng/dL
/C15Women. 30–95 ng/dL
/C15Prepubertal children. Less than 100 ng/dL (boys),
less than 40 ng/dL (girls).
Abnormal results
Increased levels of estrogen are seen in feminiza-
tion syndromes:
/C15when a male begins to develop female secondary sex
characteristics
/C15during precocious puberty
/C15when children develop secondary sexual characteris-
tics at an abnormally early age
/C15because of ovarian, testicular, or adrenal tumor
/C15During normal pregnancy,cirrhosis, and increased
thyroid levels (hyperthyroidism)
Decreased levels of estrogen are found in the fol-
lowing conditions:
/C15a failing pregnancy
/C15during menopause
/C15anorexia nervosa
/C15primary and secondary hypogonadism
/C15turner’s syndrome, seen in females with one missing
X chromosome
Increased levels of progesterone are seen:
/C15during ovulation and pregnancy
/C15with certain types of ovarian cysts
/C15with a tumor of the ovary known as a
choriocarcinoma
Decreased levels of progesterone are seen:
/C15in toxemia of pregnancy
/C15with a threatened abortion
/C15during placental failure
/C15after fetaldeath
/C15with amenorrhea
/C15due to ovarian dysfunction
Increased levels (male) of testosterone are found
in:
/C15sexual precocity
/C15the viral infection of encephalitis
/C15tumors involving the adrenal glands
/C15testicular tumors
/C15excessive thyroid production (hyperthyroidism)
/C15testosterone resistance syndromes.
Decreased levels (male) of testosterone are seen in:
/C15Klinefelter syndrome
/C15a chromosomal deficiency
/C15primary and secondary hypogonadism
/C15down syndrome
/C15surgical removal of the testicles
/C15cirrhosis.
Increased levels (females) of testosterone are
found in ovarian and adrenal tumors and in the pre-
sence of excessive hair growth of unknown cause
(hirsutism).
Resources
BOOKS
Pagana, Kathleen Deska.Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and
Laboratory Tests.St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998.
Janis O. Flores
Sex reassignment surgery see Gender reas-
signment surgery
Sex hormones tests